Life is not easy when you are pursuing something worthwhile and ready to learn from the best experiences. Most of the time, we learn the lessons from the old and wise as they have already been where we are and have done what we do. But we hardly take their advice in advance. We never think of this as a precaution. We always learn it from our life and rarely does life teach us something in a easy way. It always takes tests and then fails us to learn anything worthwhile. Here are five life lessons which people will learn the hard way in majority of cases.

　　当你想追寻值得做的事情并准备学习最好的经验时，生活并不是简单的。大多数的时候，我们从老者和智者那里学习经验，因为他们也曾经和我们一样年轻过，也曾 做过我们现在做的事情。但是我们很难提前采取他们的建议。我们从未把这当做预防措施。我们总是从自己的生活中去学习，而生活也很少用简单的方式来教我们。 它总是测试我们，让我们通过失败来学习有价值的东西。下面的这五个教训，大部分的情况下人们都是费一番苦功才会学到。

　　1.It takes consistent time and effort to be an expert in any area.

　　无论想成为哪个领域的专家，都需要付出同样的时间和努力。

　　This is the first and foremost thing to keep in mind. People usually get discouraged when it takes more time than they thought it will. One thing to keep in mind is that people refer only to people who have already achieved what you want to be, which most people fail to do. They look at other unsuccessful people and apply those criteria to them even before they take action. Look at any successful person and you’ll notice one thing common in all of them. They took time to learn and mastered their craft like no one else. There is no elevator to success; you have to take the stairs.

　　这是你要记住的第一件事，也是最重要的一件事。当人们觉得所用的时间比预想的要长时，通常都会垂头丧气。但要记住一点，人们只会提起已经取得成功的人，而 大部分的人都以失败告终。人们看着其他没成功的人，自己还未行动，就把那些准则用到他们身上。随便找出一个成功的人，你就会发现成功人士的共同点。他们都 比常人努力，拿时间去学习并掌握技能。通往成功的路上没有电梯，你只能去一级一级爬楼梯。

　　2.You don’t have to live your life in a way society wants you to.

　　你不必以社会想让你生活的方式去生活

　　Decades of old beliefs, superstitions and rituals are being performed these days and are followed blindly without questioning their rationale. Parents sometimes force their children to select a career they don’t want because other children have selected that career. Girls are made to follow some rituals in their family which makes no sense to them at all. Worst of all, people follow them without even asking. There is no harm in old rituals and beliefs but when you pursue them before your interest, sooner or later you’ll realize that you should first do what you think is right.

　　几十年的旧习、迷信和规矩最近又开始风行，人们盲目地跟风而不去质疑这样做的理论依据。父母们有时会强迫孩子选择孩子不喜欢的专业就因为其他孩子选择了那 个专业。女孩们在家里要守一些对她们来说无任何意义的规矩。最糟糕的是，人们连问都不问，就这样做。老规矩和旧习俗并无什么害处，但当你在感兴趣之前就去 做时，不久你就会意识到你应该先做自己认为是正确的事情。

　　3.We don’t care about the things we get easily.

　　我们不在乎容易得到的东西

　　This is true in all the areas of life. Take health for example. Very few people take their health seriously. They know that if their health is lost, they won’t be happy, still they eat junk food and never exercise, keep accumulating fat and keep spending on weight loss programs. Still nothing works. Why? Because they don’t take their health seriously and the real reason behind that is they have got it for free. We spend thousands on cars and take care of them nicely. Imagine what would have been the price of human body if we had to pay for it? And then imagine how well we would take care of it if we had paid a huge amount of money to get our body.

　　这一点放之四海而皆准。就拿健康为例吧。很少有人把健康当回事儿。他们知道当他们不健康时，会不开心，但是他们还是会吃垃圾食品，不去锻炼，不断积攒脂 肪，又不断去减肥。但仍是毫无效果。为什么?因为他们不拿自己的身体当回事，因为他们没有付出任何代价就拥有了身体。我们在车上花了成千上万元，所以会好 好保管车。假如人的身体是有价的，那我们得付出多少钱呢?然后再想一下，如果我们得付出很大一笔钱才能得到自己的身体，我们会怎样对待自己的身体呢?

　　4.In a world where everyone is trying to be like someone else, it takes great amount of courage to take the road less traveled.

　　在一个大家都想成为别人的世界中，需要很大勇气才能走少有人走的路。

　　In our whole life, we are always asking ten people before taking any step. We always want to validate that we are sure and do not make any mistake. We are too scared to fail hence, we follow the same path that everyone suggests, do the same thing everyone does, take the same career path everyone takes, wear the same clothes everyone wears, and hang out with the same people we work with. Why? Because we are scared. But when you get bored of life, you realize that you are not meant to do what everyone does and that your destiny is different than anyone else’s out there in the world. But the price we pay to realize this is high because it takes a tremendous amount of guts to follow your own trail by listening to your heart.

　　在我们的生活中，我们总是在行动前问10个人的看法。我们总是想确保这样做是可以的，这样做是不会犯任何错误的。我们太害怕失败了，所以我们按着别人建议 的道路去走，做别人做的事情，走别人走的职业路线，穿和别人一样的衣服，和同事一起出去玩。为什么?因为我们太害怕了。但是，当你觉得生活无聊时，你会意 识到，你不该去做别人做的事情，你的命运和世界上其他人的命运都不同。但是我们意识到这一点所需要花费的代价太高了，因为这需要大量的勇气去倾听自己的内 心来走自己的道路。

　　5.You have to break the rules sometimes.

　　有时你需要打破规则。

　　We follow rules so that things are in order and no one is disturbed unnecessarily. This is true in case of traffic and other company rules but when it comes to your life, there are rules made by people who are scared to do something apart from their routine and therefore they made rules to prevent others doing so. But when time passes by and you think you are not being directed towards your goal and these so called rules are your biggest obstacles, BREAK THEM. Sometimes, we need to be bold and act courageously.

　　我们遵守规则，这样事情就会有序，没人会受到不必要的干扰。这适用于交通规则和公司的一些规则。但是在你的生活中，有些规则是由一些除了日常活动外什么也 不敢做的人设定的，他们设定规则来阻止其他人这样做。但是随着时间的流逝，你认为自己没有朝着目标前进，那些所谓的规则是你最大的障碍。那就打破它们吧。 有时，我们需要大胆一点，需要勇敢地行动起来。

　　After all, life lessons are always learned the hard way. However, if you are smart enough to learn early and wish not to waste your precious time learning them the hard way, learn them now and apply it to your life as soon as possible.

　　毕竟，生活中的教训总是需费一番苦功才能学到。然而，如果你足够聪明想早点儿学到它们，不想把宝贵的时间浪费在费劲去学这些教训上，那么你现在就可以学习它们，并可以尽早把它们用到你的生活中。

The art of living is to know when to hold fast and when to let go. For life is a paradox: it enjoins us to cling to its many gifts even while it ordains their eventual relinquishment.

　　The rabbis of old put it this way: “A man comes to this world with his fist clenched, but when he dies, his hand is open.”

　　生活的艺术在于懂得什么时候追求，什么时候放弃。因为生活就是一个矛盾体：它要我们紧紧抓住它赐予我们的生命之礼，然后最终又让它们从我们手中跑掉。

　　老先生们说：“人们紧握着拳头来到这个世界上，离开这个世界时却摊开了双手。”

　　Surely we ought to hold fast to life, for it is wondrous, and full of a beauty that breaks through every pore of God’s own earth.

　　We know that this is so, but all too often we recognize this truth only in our backward glance when we remember what was and then suddenly realize that it is no more.

　　当然我们应该紧紧把握生活，因为它美妙得不可思议，充满了从上帝的每个毛孔里蹦出来的美。

　　我们都清楚这一点，但我们常常只有在回首往事时才会想去过去，才会突然意识到过去永远地消逝了，才会承认这个道理。

　　We remember a beauty that faded, a love that waned. But we remember with far greater pain that we did not see that beauty when it flowered, that we failed to respond with love when it was tendered.

　　我们都记得美的褪去，爱的老去。但我们更痛苦地记得美正艳时，我们却没有发现，爱正浓时，我们却没有回应。

　　Here then is the first pole of life’s paradoxical demands on us: Never too busy for the wonder and the awe of life. Be reverent before each dawning day. Embrace each hour. Seize each golden minute.

　　这就是生活对我们自己自相矛盾要求的第一步：永远不要因为忙碌而忽略了它的奇妙和庄严。对即将到来的每一天，我们都要心怀敬意，拥抱没一小时，抓住每一分钟。

　　Hold fast to life... but not so fast that you cannot let go. This is the second side of life’s coin, the opposite pole of its paradox: we must accept our losses, and learn how to let go.

　　抓住生活，但不要抓得太紧，以至你放不下手。这就是生活像硬币一样也有另一面，也是生活矛盾的另一极：我们必须接受放弃，并且学会怎样让它过去。

　　This is not an easy lesson to learn, especially when we are young and think that the world is ours to command, that whatever we desire with the full force of our passionate being can, nay, will, be ours.

　　But then life moves along to confront us with realities, and slowly but surely this truth dawns upon us.

　　学会这些并非易事。特别是年少轻狂的时候，我们自认为是世界的主宰者，认为只要充满激情地全力追求，就可以得到一切。

　　然而，事实并非如此。只有在面对种种现实时，我们才会渐渐没明白这个道理。

　　At every stage of life we sustain losses—and grow in the process. We begin our independent lives only when we emerge from the womb and lose its protective shelter.

　　We enter a progression of schools, then we leave our mothers and fathers and our childhood homes. We get married and have children and then have to let them go.

　　We confront the death of our parents and our spouses. We face the gradual or not so gradual waning of our strength.

　　And ultimately, as the parable of the open and closed hand suggests, we must confront the inevitability of our own demise, losing ourselves as it were, all that we were or dreamed to be.

　　在人生的各个阶段，我们都会蒙受损失——并且在这一过程中成长。只有在脱离母体.失去庇护所时，我们才会开始独立的生活。

　　我们不断地升学，接着又离开父母，离开儿时的故乡。继而，我们结婚生子，然后又放手让自己的子女出去闯荡。

　　随着父母和配偶的相继离世，我们也逐渐或者很快衰老。

　　最终，正如双手张开与紧握这一寓言所说，我们必须面对自身的死亡，失去原来的自我，失去我们拥有过或者憧憬过的一切。

1.Without you，I'd be a soul without a purpose. Without you，I'd be an emotion without a heart. I'm a face without expression,A heart with no beat. Without you by my side,I'm just a flame without the

　　没有你，我将是一个没有目的的灵魂;没有你，我的情感将没有了根基;我将是一张没有表情的脸，一颗停止跳动的心;没有你在我身边，我只是一束没有热量的火焰。

　　2.If you were a teardrop in my eye. For fear of losing you,I would never cry. And if the golden sun,Should cease to shine its light. Just one smile from you,Would make my whole world bright

　　如果你是我眼里的;一滴泪;为了不失去你;我将永不哭泣;如果金色的阳光;停止了它耀眼的光芒;你的一个微笑;将照亮我的整个世界。

　　3.If I were to fall in love,It would have to be with youYour eyes, your smile,The way you laugh,The things you say and do. Take me to the places,My heart never knew. So, if I were to fall in love,It would have to be with you.

　　如果说我已陷入情网;我的情人就是你;你的眼睛，你的微笑;你的笑脸;你说的一切，你做的一切;让我的心迷失了方向;所以，如果说我已陷入情网，我的爱人就是你。

　　4.Forgive me for needing you in my life; Forgive me for enjoying the beauty of your body and soul; Forgive me for wanting to be with you when I grow old

　　原谅我生活中不能没有你;原谅我欣赏你躯体和心灵的美丽;原谅我希望永生永世和你在一起。

　　5.My river runs to thee. Blue sea, wilt thou welcome me? My river awaits reply.Oh! sea, look graciously.

　　我是一条朝你奔流而去的小溪，蓝色的大海啊，你愿意接纳我吗?优雅的大海啊，小溪正在等待你的回答。

　　6.All it took was one glance.Now all I ask is one chance,To try to win your heart.Just give me a chance to start.I'll show you it was meant to be.To be together is our destiny

　　我对你一见钟情。我所要求的全部就是给我一个机会，以赢取你的芳心。只要给我一个开始的机会,我将向你证明这是前世的安排，我俩的结合是冥冥之中的定数。

　　7.Two star-crossed lovers in perfect harmony Just give me a chance and you will agree.I was meant for you.And you were meant for me.

　　两个命运多舛的情人如此和谐地在一起，只要给我一线希望，你终将答应。我为你而生，你因我而存在。

　　8.Please forgive me for falling in love with you.Forgive me for loving you with all my heart.Forgive me for never wanting to be apart.

　　请原谅我爱上你;原谅我用全部的身心爱你;原谅我永不愿与你分离。

　　9.Without you?I'd be a soul without a purpose.Without you?I'd be an emotion without a heart.I'm a face without expression,A heart with no beat.Without you by my side,I'm just a flame without the heat.

　　没有你? 我将是一个没有目的的灵魂;没有你? 我的情感将没有了根基;我将是一张没有表情的脸;一颗停止跳动的心;没有你在我身边;我只是一束没有热量的火焰。

　　10.If you were a teardrop;In my eye,For fear of losing you,I would never cry.And if the golden sun,Should cease to shine its light,Just one smile from you,Would make my whole world bright.

　　如果你是我眼里的;一滴泪;为了不失去你;我将永不哭泣;如果金色的阳光;停止了它耀眼的光芒;你的一个微笑;将照亮我的整个世界。

　　11.If I were to fall in love,It would have to be with you.Your eyes, your smile,The way you laugh,The things you say and do.Take me to the places,My heart never knew.So, if I were to fall in love,It would have to be with you.

　　如果说我已陷入情网;我的情人就是你;你的眼睛，你的微笑;你的笑脸;你说的一切，你做的一切;让我的心迷失了方向;所以，如果说我已陷入情网;我的爱人就是你。

　　12.Forgive me for needing you in my life;Forgive me for enjoying the beauty of your body and soul;Forgive me for wanting to be with you when I grow old.

　　原谅我生活中不能没有你;原谅我欣赏你躯体和心灵的美丽;原谅我希望永生永世和你在一起。

　　13.There is a lady sweet and kind, Was never a face so pleased my mind;I did but see her passing by, And yet, I'll love her till I die.

　　有一位姑娘甜美又溫柔;從未有一張臉讓我如此心蕩神搖;我只看見她經過;就會愛她到永遠。

　　14.When I wake up in the morning,You are all I see;When I think about you,And how happy you make me.You're everything I wanted;You're everything I need;I look at you and know;That you are all to me.

　　當我在早晨醒來,我看到的只有你;當我想你的時候,你讓我快樂無比;你是我想要的一切;你的我需要的一切。我凝視著你，知道，你是我的一切。

　　15.You make me feel so happy;Whenever I'm with you.You make me feel so special--This love is too good to be true.

　　任何時候和你在一起，你都讓我覺得如此開心，給我的感覺如些特別──這份愛如此美好，它真的存在嗎?

I have seen a thousand sunsets and sunrises, on land where it floods forest and mountains with honey-coloured light, at sea where it rises and sets like a blood orange in a multi-coloured nest of cloud, slipping in and out of the vast ocean.

　　我曾见过千番日出和日落。大地上的森林与高山被镀上一层蜜色光泽，在它升落的海面，好似五彩云团里的一颗血橙出没不止，在那浩瀚汪洋间。

　　I have seen a thousand moons: harvest moons like gold coins; winter moons as white as ice chips; new moons like baby swans' feathers.

　　我见过千般月色。满月好似金币，冬日寒月白如冰屑，新月宛如雏天鹅的绒羽。

　　I have seen seas as smooth as if painted, coloured like shot silk or blue as a kingfisher or transparent as glass or black and crumpled with foam, moving ponderously and murderously.

　　我曾见过大海静谧如画。色似锦缎，或蓝如翠羽，或通透似玻璃，或乌色泛褶出泡沫，汹涌得沉重又狠恶。

　　I have felt winds straight from the South Pole, bleak and wailing like a lost child; winds as tender and warm as a lover's breath; winds that carried the astringent smell of salt and the death of seaweeds; winds that carried the moist rich smell of a forest floor, the smell of a million flowers; fierce winds that churned and moved the sea like yeast; or winds that made the waters lap at the shore like a kitten.

　　我曾感受过风，凛冽自南极而来，刺骨哀嚎，仿佛迷途的小孩。风，温柔和煦如爱人的呼吸;风，承载着盐与海藻湮灭的咸涩;风，充盈着森林土壤的气息，温润肥沃，芬芳，自百万花朵。狂风蹈海，如同发了酵起了沫，又或风驱着水波拍岸，猫咪轻扑一般。

　　I have known silence: the cold, earthy silence at the bottom of a newly dug well; the implacable stony silence of a deep cave; the hot, drugged midday silence when everything is hypnotized and stilled into silence by the eye of the sun; the silence when great music ends.

　　我曾知悉静默。那在一眼新井里的静默，冷冽且夹着泥土气味，深邃洞穴中的静默，冷酷决绝;酷热迷离，正午的静默，万物被当空烈日催眠，平息而至静默;静默，当天籁终了时。

　　I have heard summer cicadas cry so that the sound seems stitched into your bones.

　　我曾听夏日蝉嘶，那声声如芒刺骨。

　　I have heard tree frogs in an orchestration as complicated as Bach, singing in a forest lit by a million emerald fireflies.

　　我曾听树蛙在林中咏唱，复杂严谨俨如巴赫，翠绿萤火虫为之燃起百万点亮光。

　　I have seen Whales, black as tar, cushioned on a cornflower blue sea, creating a Versailles of fountain with their breath.

　　我见过鲸鱼，黝似沥青，衬着矢车菊般蓝蓝的大海，他们一呼一吸之间，筑起凡尔赛的喷泉。

　　I have watched butterflies emerge and sit, trembling, while the sun irons their swings smooth.

　　我见过蝴蝶破茧时危坐，颤栗着，任由阳光把鳞翼熨平。

　　I have watched tigers, like flames, mating in the long grass.

　　我见过虎，好似烈焰，在长草深处交欢。

　　I have been dive-bombed by an angry Raven, black and glossy as a Devil's hoof.

　　我曾被愤怒的渡鸦俯冲轰炸，玄青浮光，似魔鬼之蹄。

　　I have lain in water warm as milk, soft as silk, while around me played a host of Dolphins.

　　我曾躺在温润如奶、柔滑如丝的水中，以客道迎待周遭的海豚。

　　I have met a thousand animals and seen a thousand wonderful things. All this I did without you. This was my loss. All this I want to do with you. This will be my gain. All this I would gladly have forgone for the sake of one minute of your company, for your laugh, your voice, your eyes, hair, lips, body, and above all for your sweet, ever surprising mind which is an enchanting quarry in which it is my privilege to delve.

　　我遇过千种生灵，见过千般绝妙的事情。这一切曾经，没与你携手，于我尽是枉过。这一切将历，有你在左右，于我便为收获。这一切所有，我愿放弃，只为换取你一分钟的相伴，换你的笑语、你的声音，换你明眸、秀发、朱唇、玉体，最重要的，换你那美妙而几可惊叹的心智，那迷人的宝藏，唯有我一人，有权探究。
人人常常会感觉到不幸福。

　　因为现在的媒体会煽情地宣传幸福：追求成功，紧跟时代，拥有金钱即拥有幸福。

　　有的还把幸福量化为拥有高级物质享受，把幸福具体化为别墅、靓车、美女帅哥等，作为奋斗目标拼命追求。似乎有了这些就一定幸福、惟一的幸福。

　　没错，一定的物质享受是幸福的基础，贫困又灾难重重，水深火热的生活显然称不上幸福。

　　但是，难道幸福这快乐、温暖的宠儿仅仅一定是金钱财富的附属品衍生物吗?除此就没有幸福吗?

　　不是的。

　　Happiness is ...

　　researching places for your upcoming holiday.

　　幸福是为自己做旅游计划

　　Happiness is ...recharging.

　　幸福是舒舒服服地给自己充电

　　Happiness is ...

　　getting a gift that you really love.

　　幸福是受到自己特别喜爱的礼物

　　Happiness is ...a warm bed.

　　幸福就是守着自己的暖窝啦

　　Happiness is ...

　　when reality is better than expectations.

　　幸福就是一切发生的都比想象的美好

　　Happiness is ...

　　having friends who are idiots.

　　幸福就是一群跟你一起犯二的朋友

　　Happiness is ...

　　deciding to not say negative things.

　　幸福就是一直正言相向

　　Happiness is ...

　　your parents voices when you're far away from home.

　　幸福就是在千里之外听到爸妈的寒暄

　　Happiness is ...

　　watching the sea.

　　幸福就只是望着大海

　　Happiness is ...

　　watching the rain.

　　幸福就只是趴在窗口看着柔柔的雨

　　Happiness is ...

　　sharing good news with someone even though they're thousands of miles away.

　　幸福就是跟千里之外的小伙伴分享好消息

　　Happiness is ...

　　having a cute pet.

　　幸福就是拥有一个萌爆了的宠物

　　Happiness is ...

　　sitting still and feeling the air on your skin.

　　幸福就是静静地坐在那里感受着威风拂过皮肤

　　Happiness is ...

　　not giving a shit what people think of you.

　　幸福就是有一种我爱干嘛干嘛关你毛事的态度

　　Happiness is ...

　　spending time outdoors.

　　幸福就是出去玩儿

　　Everybody has their own definition of happiness,

　　tell me what yours is ..

　　每个人都有自己对幸福的定义，

　　你的幸福是什么?

　　留言分享给大家吧~
Already run one mile a day? Why not try seven?

　　你已经在每天一公里长跑了?为什么不试试一天七公里呢?

　　What makes someone uncomfortable depends on the person, but what's universally true is the value of recognizing boundaries and continually pushing them.

　　让人们感到不适的事情因人而异，但有一条普遍性的原则，即认识到自己能力的界限并不断挑战自己的界限，这是非常重要的。

　　Here are some uncomfortable things that other Quora users have found helped them grow:

　　下面是一些知乎网上的网友提供的事例，这些事情做起来让他们不舒服，却也帮助他们成长。

　　1

　　Question everything.

　　质疑周遭的一切

　　The most uncomfortable thing one can do is to question everything that is taken for granted and seek answers. Try to see the other side of the norm.

　　最让人不适的事情就是质疑一切被人们习以为常的事情，并且去寻找答案，尝试去认识常规事物的另一面。

　　2

　　Be honest.

　　保持诚实

　　Being the most honest you've ever been with someone in your life will be one of the most uncomfortable things you can do, but it could also be the most valuable.

　　在你生活中遇到的某人面前保持前所未及的诚实态度，这也将是你做过的最令人难受的事情之一。不过它也可能成为最有价值的一件事。

　　To do this, he suggests writing a list of all the people to whom you have something — good or bad — to say; writing down the honest feelings you need to convey to them in a letter; handing the person the letter; and writing down what happened and how the experience affected you and the other person.

　　为了做到这一点，你应该列一张清单，写下那些你对他有话要讲的人的名字，无论你想说的是好事还是坏事;用最坦诚的言语将你的感受写在信里传达给他们，亲手将信交给对方，将你所谈及的事情对你对他的影响写下来传达给他。

　　3

　　Wake up extremely early.

　　起床超级超级早

　　Ekin Öcalan loves to wake up before sunrise because it provides the perfect study-and-work environment. While everyone else sleeps, waking at 5 a.m. is the perfect, way to begin the day in silence.

　　有网友非常喜欢在日出之前起床，这段时间往往是学习工作的最佳时段。在凌晨5点，别人都还在睡觉的时候你已经起床，让你的一天从完美的静谧中开始，这种感受非常美妙。

　　4

　　Watch your pennies.

　　看住自己的钢镚儿

　　From auto repairs and life insurance to coffee and french fries, keep track of every penny you spend for several months.

　　从自动修理机到咖啡、薯条等基本生活物资，给你所花的每分钱记个账，坚持几个月。

　　And try paying for everything you can with cash. If you have to reach in your wallet and pull out cash, you will often think twice about how much you need something.

　　试着在买任何东西的时候都用现金支付。当你在买东西的时候，一旦你需要把手伸进口袋，取出现金，你就会慎重考虑你是否真的需要它了。

　　5

　　Track what you eat.

　　记下你吃过的食物

　　Keeping track of all the food you eat and all the exercise you do in a day can be challenging, but this helped one web user see the harm she was doing to her body.

　　记录下你一整天里吃过的所有食物以及做过的锻炼活动，这会是一项挑战。可是这样做让一位网友了解到了，她曾对自己的身体造成怎样的伤害。

　　"I didn't realize how little of some nutrients I was getting and how much sugar and fat I was getting daily until I started to do this regularly," she writes.

　　“过去我从未意识到自己每天摄取的营养多么少，吃下的糖分和脂肪多么过量，直到我开始每天做记录。”她写道。

　　6

　　Eat only nutritious food.

　　只吃有营养的食物

　　After you track your food, start eating only what is truly nutritious — This will change your life forever.

　　记录下自己的每日饮食之后，开始做到只吃真正有营养的食物吧——这样做会永远改变你的生活。

　　This will be uncomfortable for a number of reasons: It's hard; it's socially limiting; it can be more expensive if you are used to eating off the dollar menu; it's not as tasty when you start, and it takes more time.

　　你会感到不适，有很多原因：做到这件事很难;它会让你的社交生活受限制;你的开销会比过去吃快餐的时候大得多;刚开始的时候，你感到这些食物并不可口，又要花更多时间准备。

　　But the outcome is 100% worth the effort. "Being a weird health nut and outperforming everyone else is so much more fun than blending in — and that's not just athletically. It's mentally as well."

　　可是你所得到的收获绝对值得你这样付出。“做一个坚持健康饮食的傻瓜，比其他任何人都注重健康，这样做比跟其他人一起吃垃圾食品要好得多——这不仅对你的身体有益，对你的大脑也有益。

　　7

　　Practice public speaking.

　　练习在公众面前演讲

　　It may be scary to think about, but you never know when you may be called upon to speak in public. Practice, while daunting, is the key to improving your communication skills.

　　这件事想想都让人害怕，可你永远都不知道什么时候会被叫到去台上讲话。多加练习——尽管你会很紧张——是提高你的口头表达能力的关键。

　　It's scary as hell until you realize that everyone around you feels the same.

　　你会吓得要死，直到你发现，其实身边每个人都和你的感受一样。

　　8

　　Accomplish an almost impossible goal.

　　完成一个几乎不可能达到的目标

　　The most uncomfortable thing you can do is to set and achieve a goal that's harder than something you've ever done before.

　　给自己定下目标，要做到一件比你做过的任何事都困难的事，然后真的达成目标。这可能是最让你感到不适的事情。

　　To do that, think about a thing you're comfortable doing every day and amplify it until you get to a point where you become really scared of doing it. If you run a mile every day, the idea of running seven might terrify you. Set this as your one-year goal.

　　为了做到这一点，可以设想一件自己每天都做并且应付自如的事情，然后将它的难度增大，直到你感到自己对它感到颇为恐惧。如果你每天可以跑一公里，努力每天跑七公里的目标可能会吓到你。可以将它设为你的年度目标。

　　9

　　Pick just one thing to master at a time.

　　每次只选择一件事情并完成它

　　Your approach to self-betterment might be trying as many things as possible and seeing what works. But using the opposite tactic, though uncomfortable, is key.

　　或许你提高自己的方法是，试着完成很多很多事情，越多越好，看看自己能做到哪一件。然而，用一种相反的策略才是完成这些事情的关键，尽管这会让你感到不适。

　　If you're constantly changing interests, you're never going to discover your own internal progress. So pick one thing and become progressively committed to mastering it. It doesn't matter what it is, anything will do, as long as you do.

　　如果你想做的事总是在变幻，你永远不会察觉到自己内在的进步幅度。所以你应该选定一件事，下定决心，一步一步地完成它。这件事是什么不重要，任何事情都可以，只要你真正去做。
Dear son.

　　孩子：

　　The day that you see me old and I am already not, have patience and try to understand me.

　　哪天你看到我日渐老去，身体也渐渐不行，请耐着性子试着了解我。

　　If I get dirty when eating, if I cannot dress, have patience.

　　如果我吃的脏兮兮，如果我不会穿衣服。有耐性一点。

　　Remember the hours I spent teaching it to you.

　　你记得我曾花多久时间教你这些事吗?

　　If, when I speak to you, I repeat the same things thousand and one times.

　　如果，当我一再重复述说，

　　Do not interrupt me, listen to me.

　　同样的事情，不要打断我，听我说。

　　When you were small, I had to read to you thousand and one times the same story until you get to sleep.

　　你小时候，我必须一遍又一遍的读着同样的故事，直到你静静睡着。

　　When I do not want to have a shower, neither shame me nor scold me.

　　当我不想洗澡，不要羞辱我也不要责骂我。

　　Remember when I had to chase you with thousand excuses I invented, in order that you wanted to bath.

　　你记得小时后我曾编出多少理由，只为了哄你洗澡。

　　When you see my ignorance on new technologies, give me the necessary time and not look at me with your mocking smile.

　　当你看到我对新科技的无知，给我一点时间，不要挂着嘲弄的微笑看着我。

　　I taught you how to do so many things, to eat good, to dress well, to confront life.

　　我曾教了你多少事情啊：如何好好的吃，好好的穿;如何面对你的生命。

　　When at some moment I lose the memory or the thread of our conversation.

　　如果交谈中我忽然失忆不知所云，

　　let me have the necessary time to remember.

　　给我一点时间回想;

　　and if I cannot do it,

　　如果我还是无能为力，

　　do not become nervous,

　　请不要紧张。

　　as the most important thing is not my conversation but surely to be with you and to have you listening to me.

　　对我而言重要的不是对话，而是能跟你在一起，和你的倾听。
Sometimes I really doubt whether there is love between my parents. Every day they are very busy trying to earn money in order to pay the high tuition for my brother and me.

　　有时候，我真的怀疑父母之间是否有真爱。他们天天忙于赚钱，为我和弟弟支付学费。

　　They don't act in the romantic ways that I read in books or I see on TV. In their opinion, 'I love you' is too luxurious for them to say. Sending flowers to each other on Valentine's Day is even more out of the question.

　　他们从未像我在书中读到，或在电视中看到的那样互诉衷肠。他们认为”我爱你”太奢侈，很难说出口。更不用说在情人节送花这样的事了。

　　Finally my father has a bad temper. When he's very tired from the hard work, it is easy for him to lose his temper.

　　我父亲的脾气非常坏。经过一天的劳累之后，他经常会发脾气。

　　One day, my mother was sewing a quilt. I silently sat down beside her and looked at her.

　　一天，母亲正在缝被子，我静静地坐在她旁边看着她。

　　'Mom, I have a question to ask you,' I said after a while.

　　过了一会，我说：”妈妈，我想问你一个问题。”

　　'What?' she replied, still doing her work.

　　“什么问题?”她一边继续缝着，一边回答道。

　　'Is there love between you and Dad?' I asked her in a very low voice.

　　我低声地问道：”你和爸爸之间有没有爱情啊?”

　　My mother stopped her work and raised her head with surprise in her eyes. She didn't answer immediately. Then she bowed her head and continued to sew the quilt.

　　母亲突然停下了手中的活，满眼诧异地抬起头。她没有立即作答。然后低下头，继续缝被子。

　　I was very worried because I thought I had hurt her. I was in a great embarrassment and I didn't know what I should do. But at last I heard my mother say the following words:

　　我担心伤害了她。我非常尴尬，不知道该怎么办。不过，后来我听见母亲说：

　　'Susan,' she said thoughtfully, 'Look at this thread.Sometimes it appears, but most of it disappears in the quilt. The thread really makes the quilt strong and durable. If life is a quilt, then love should be a thread. It can hardly be seen anywhere or anytime, but it’s really there. Love is inside.'

　　“苏珊，看看这些线。有时候，你能看得见，但是大多数都隐藏在被子里。这些线使被子坚固耐用。如果生活就像一床被子，那么爱就是其中的线。你不可能随时随地看到它，但是它却实实在在地存在着。爱是内在的

　　I listened carefully but I couldn't understand her until the next spring.

　　我仔细地听着，却无法明白她的话，直到来年的春天。

　　At that time, my father suddenly got sick seriously. My mother had to stay with him in the hospital for a month.

　　那时候，我父亲得了重病。母亲在医院里待了一个月。

　　When they returned from the hospital, they both looked very pale. It seemed both of them had had a serious illness.

　　当他们从医院回来的时候，都显得非常苍白。就像他们都得了一场重病一样。

　　After they were back, every day in the morning and dusk, my mother helped my father walk slowly on the country road.

　　他们回来之后，每天的清晨或黄昏，母亲都会搀扶着父亲在乡村的小路上漫步。

　　My father had never been so gentle. It seemed they were the most harmonious couple.

　　父亲从未如此温和过。他们就像是天作之合。

　　Along the country road, there were many beautiful flowers, green grass and trees.

　　在小路旁边，有许多美丽的野花、绿草和树木。

　　The sun gently glistened through the leaves. All of these made up the most beautiful picture in the world.

　　阳光穿过树叶的缝隙，温柔地照射在地面上。这一切形成了一幅世间最美好的画面。

　　The doctor had said my father would recover in two months. But after two months he still couldn't walk by himself. All of us were worried about him.

　　医生说父亲将在两个月后康复。但是两个月之后，他仍然无法独立行走。我们都很为他担心。

　　'Dad, how are you feeling now?' I asked him one day.

　　有一天，我问他：“爸爸，你感觉怎么样?”

　　'Susan, don't worry about me.' he said gently. 'To tell you the truth, I just like walking with your mom. I like this kind of life.' Reading his eyes, I know he loves my mother deeply.

　　他温和地说：“苏珊，不用为我担心。跟你说吧，我喜欢与你妈妈一块散步的感觉。我喜欢这种生活。”从他的眼神里，我看得出他对母亲的爱之深刻。

　　Once I thought love meant flowers, gifts and sweet kisses. But from this experience, I understand that love is just a thread in the quilt of our life. Love is inside, making life strong and warm..

　　我曾经认为爱情就是鲜花、礼物和甜蜜的亲吻。但是从那一刻起，我明白了，爱情就像是生活中被子里的一根线。爱情就在里面，使生活变得坚固而温暖。
Occasionally, life can be undeniably, impossibly difficult. We are faced with challenges and events that can seem overwhelming, life-destroying to the point where it may be hard to decide whether to keep going. But you always have a choice. Jessica Heslop shares her powerful, inspiring journey from the worst times in her life to the new life she has created for herself:

　　生活有时候困难得难以置信，但又不容置疑。我们面临的挑战与困境似乎无法抵御，试图毁灭我们生活，甚至使你犹疑是否继续走下去。但是你总有选择的余地。从人生低谷走向新生活的杰西卡·赫斯乐普，在这里与我们分享她启迪心灵、充满震撼力的生活之旅。

　　In 2012 I had the worst year of my life.

　　2012年是我生活中最艰难的一年。

　　I worked in a finance job that I hated and I lived in a concrete jungle city with littlegreenery. I occupied my time with meaningless relationships and spent copiousquantities of money on superficialities. I was searching for happiness and had no idea where to find it.

　　我做着讨厌的财务工作，住在难寻绿色的高楼林立的城市。我忙于无意义的交往，在一些肤浅表面的东西上大笔开销。我寻找快乐，却又不知道它在哪里。

　　Then I fell ill with Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) and became virtually bed bound. I had to quit my job and subsequently was left with no income. I lived with my boyfriend of then only 3 months who financially supported me and our relationship was put under great pressure. I eventually regained my physical health, but not long after that I got a call from my family at home to say that my father’s cancer had fiercely progressed and that he had been admitted to a hospice.

　　然后我患上了慢性疲劳综合症，几乎到了卧床不起的地步。我不得不辞掉工作，同时也就断了财源。我和那时仅相处了3个月的男友住在一起，经济上完全依赖于他，我们的关系承受着巨大压力。终于我恢复健康，但不久，我接到家里的电话，父亲的癌症急剧恶化，已经住进了临终关怀中心。

　　I left the city and I went home to be with him.

　　我离开了城市，回家陪父亲。

　　He died 6 months later.

　　6个月之后，他去世了。

　　My father was a complete inspiration to me. He was always so strong that, for a minute after he drew his last breath, I honestly thought he would come back to life. I couldn’t believe I would never again cuddle into his big warm chest and feel safe no matter what.

　　父亲的事让我彻底清醒。他一直很强壮，在他咽气之后一分钟里，我真的认为，他会活过来。我不能相信，我再也不能依偎在他温暖的怀抱里，享受他宽大的胸怀带给我的安全感。

　　The grief that followed was intense for all of us 5 children and our mother, but we had each other.

　　母亲和我们5个兄弟姐妹极为难过，但至少我们还拥有彼此。

　　But my oldest sister at that time complained of a bad back. It got so bad after 2 months that she too was admitted to hospital.

　　但是，那时我大姐开始抱怨着背痛，2个月后，因疼痛加剧也住进了医院。

　　They discovered that she had highly advanced cancer in her bones and that there was nothing that they could do.

　　医生们检查发现，她已是骨癌晚期，对此他们已无能为力。

　　She died 1 month later.

　　1个月之后，她也走了。

　　I could never put into words the loss of my sister in my life.

　　大姐的逝去让我陷入难以形容的痛苦之中。

　　She was a walking, talking angel and my favourite person in the whole world. If someone could have asked me the worst thing that could ever happen, it would have been losing her.

　　在这个世界上，她是一个能走路、会说话的天使，我最喜欢的人。如果有人问我，世界上发生的最坏的事情是什么，那就是失去她。

　　She was my soul-mate and I never thought I would journey this lifetime without her.

　　她是我的灵魂伴侣，我从来没有想过，我会走过没有她陪伴的生命旅程。

　　The Moment Of Deliberate Choice

　　抉择时刻

　　The shock and extreme heart break brought me to my knees. The pain was so great and my world just looked desolate. I had no real home, no money, no job, and no friends that cared. Not one person had even sent me a sympathy card for my loss.

　　我被打击和极度的心痛击挎了。强烈的痛苦使世界在我眼中变得如此凄凉。我没有真正意义上的家，没有钱，没有工作，也没有关心我的朋友。没有一个人因我失去亲人而寄给我慰问卡。

　　I made an attempt of my own life and I ended up in hospital.

　　我尝试着活下去，结果住进了医院。

　　I remember lying in the hospital bed, looking up at the ceiling and seeing my sister’s beautiful face. She stayed with me all night long.

　　我记得，躺在病床上，看着天花板，看到姐姐美丽的面庞。她整夜守候着我。

　　I realised during that night that I had a choice. I could choose to end my life or I could choose to live it.

　　那天晚上，我意识到我可以选择。要么结束生命，要么活下去。

　　I looked in my sister’s eyes and I made a decision not to go with her just yet. That I would stay and complete my journey here.

　　望着姐姐的眼睛，我决定不跟她走。我要留下来，走完我的生命旅程。

　　I also made the decision that, I wouldn’t just live any life. I would live the life that I absolutely LOVE and nothing less.

　　同时，我还决定，不只为生活而生活，我要完全以自己想要的方式生活。

　　In that moment, the clarity that descended around me was like a light shining in a dark room for the first time. As if the earth’s plates had shifted under my feet and everything suddenly looked real for the first time.

　　在那一刻，这一想法第一次清晰得如同一盏在黑暗闪烁的明灯。好像脚下的地球版块变换了，每一样东西在我眼前都真实得前所未有。

　　The Blossoms Of My Newly Chosen Life

　　我的生活之花重新绽放了

　　Since then I have begun to shape the most beautiful life for myself.

　　从那时起，我开始为自己塑造最美丽的生活。

　　I now live in an adorable stone cottage in a stunningly green, luscious region of the UK amongst woodlands and lakes.

　　现在，我住在英国一栋迷人的小石屋里，绿树掩映，与湖为伴，景色美丽宜人。

　　I have a deeply harmonious, joyful relationship with my amazing boyfriend, who’s gone through all this with me and we are very happy together.

　　我的男友很好，我们的关系和谐美好，他曾伴我度过那段艰难时期，现在我们一起分享着快乐。

　　I write a blog that inspires others to live the life that they love. It is what I know I was born to do and it truly makes my heart sing.

　　我写博客，激励他人过他们喜欢的生活。我知道这是我生来要做的事情，它真正使我感受到发自内心的快乐。

　　I am making new friends with beautiful souls all around the world.

　　我和世界上有着美好心灵的人交朋友。

　　I practise gratitude for my life every single day and I feel the abundance in everything I have now.

　　每一天，我满怀对生活的感激之情，我满足于我现在拥有的一切。

　　I spend quality time with the rest of my precious family and cherish every moment I have with them.

　　我与心爱的家人共度快乐时光，珍惜与他们相处的每一刻。

　　I have written a bucket list and am already manifesting so much of which I have always dreamed.

　　我列出愿望清单，它很大程度上体现了我一直以来梦想。

　　I connect with my heart often to ensure that I am always following my joy.

　　我时常与心交流，确保做着喜欢的事。

　　I love myself more deeply every day.

　　我一天比一天更爱自己。

　　I live authentically now.

　　现在我真正地活着。

　　Waking Up

　　清醒

　　It took something powerfully transformative in my life to make me wake up. Wake up to some fundamental truths of life.This life is a gift if you want to accept it. No matter what the obstacle, you can make your life abundant with joy and you can live authentically.

　　生活中一些重大变化使我清醒，使我意识到生活的基本真理。如果你愿意接受生活，它就是礼物。无论遭遇任何困难，你总能让生活充满快乐，真正地生活。

　　Not a day goes by when I don’t miss my father’s huge character or my beloved sister’s gentle brown eyes, but I know that I will be with them one day for an eternity. What I have now is so precious and so fleeting that I must grasp the joy in every moment I can, and treat it as the gift that it is.

　　没有哪一天，我不思念父亲温暖的怀抱或至爱的姐姐温柔的棕色眼睛，但是，我知道，终有一天我会与他们相聚。我现在拥有的是如此珍贵、如此易逝，我必须尽情享受每一刻的欢愉，将其视为上帝的馈赠。

　　You choose life every day. But do you choose the life that you love every day?

　　每一天，你选择生活。但是，你是否每一天都过着想要的生活?
Everyone experiences unhappy times on occasion, but there is a big difference between experiencing a temporary bout of sadness and living a habitually unhappy life. That’s what chronically unhappy people do.

　　每个人都会时不时地觉得不开心，但是偶然觉得不开心和长期过着悲伤的日子是截然不同的。下面是长期不快乐的人经常做的事情。

　　Even if you are generally a happy person, take a look at these seven habits to determine if any of them are keeping you from experiencing greater amounts of joy.

　　即使你过着开心的日子，也请看一下下面的这七个习惯，你也许会发现，如果自己没有其中的某些习惯，可能会更开心!

　　1. Playing it too safe. 过于保守

　　Don’t play it so safe that you put yourself in situations where none of your potential options satisfy your calling. Dream your dream, but also realize that you are more than just the dreamer, you are the point of origin for your dream’s reality.

　　过于保守的话，你的潜能就无法满足你的心愿。要有梦想，但也要意识到你不仅仅是个梦想家，你还是梦想的现实起点。

　　Your dream is your creative vision for your future life. You must break out of your current comfort zone and become comfortable with the unfamiliar. Start smashing through those emotional barriers. Move forward. Life doesn’t magically give you what you want in your mind; it gives you what you insist upon with your actions.

　　你的梦想是你未来生活创造性的愿景。你必须走出当前的舒适区，习惯你所不熟悉的内容。打破这些情感障碍，往前走。生活不会奇迹般地给你想要的东西，它会给你你自己用行为坚持下来的东西。

　　2. Continuous self doubt. 一直自我怀疑

　　You will inevitably become who you believe yourself to be.

　　你不可避免地成为你想成为的人。

　　If you spend enough time saying, “I’m not smart enough, thin enough and rich enough,” it’s likely that you will someday be right. On the contrary, if you have the belief that you are smart enough, thin enough and rich enough now to take the next positive step forward, over time you will likely acquire the capacity to be these very things at your desired level of expectation.

　　如果你花了足够的时间说，“我不够聪明，不够瘦，不够富有，”很有可能有一天你会发现这是真的。相反，如果你相信自己够聪明，够瘦，够富有，可以继续向前迈出积极的一步，随着时间的推移，你很有可能获得为达到梦想所需要的能力。

　　3. Obsession with control. 迷恋控制

　　Sometimes people put too much interest into trying to control every tiny aspect of their lives. Learn to let go, relax and ride the path that life takes you. Try something new, take a chance, but above all, smile and enjoy the scenery.

　　有时人们过于喜欢控制生活中的细微方面。学着去放手，放松心情，去走前面的路。尝试一些新的事物，冒冒险，但是最重要的，是微笑并欣赏途中的美景。

　　Freeing yourself from trying to control the insignificant things lets you experience more of the good stuff around you. The greatest joys in life are often the unexpected surprises that arrive when you are flexible and open to life’s twists and turns.

　　不去纠结微不足道的小事，你会发现身边还有很多好东西。生活中最大的快乐，莫过于当你适应了生活中的曲折时那不期而遇的惊喜。

　　4. Setting unrealistic expectations.

　　设定不切实际的目标

　　You won’t drop two jean sizes overnight. Your relationships won’t grow without your attention. You can’t pay off $25K in debt in a week. Your new business venture won’t instantly turn a profit.

　　你的牛仔裤尺寸不可能一夜之间就小两号。如果你不努力，你的人际关系也不会有进展。你不可能在一周的时间内付清两万五千美元。你的新事业也不可能立刻盈利。

　　You’re going to make mistakes every now and then. You will go a day or two when you feel like you’re running in place. You’re going to try new techniques and they’re not always going to work. You’re a human being. You’re going to fail from time to time. But that’s how you grow. Worthwhile goals take work and persistence.

　　你会时不时地犯错误。经过一两天的时间你才会觉得准备就绪。你准备尝试新的技巧，但是它们并不总是有用。你是一个人，你会时不时地失败。但是只有这样你才能成长。重要的目标需要努力和坚持。

　　5. A bad attitude. 恶劣的态度

　　The greatest discovery you will ever make is that you can change your life by simply changing your attitude. Optimism is the most essential human trait, because it allows you to evolve your ideas and improve every situation you encounter.

　　仅仅通过改变态度就可以改变生活，这也许是你未来的最大发现。乐观是人类最重要的品质，因为它能让你改进你的想法，改善你遇到的每一种情形。

　　So don’t take things for granted. Be positive and realize how fortunate you are. Not every day will be perfect, but if you pay attention you’ll realize that 99.9% of the time you’re having either a good day or a great day.

　　所以不要总是觉得理所当然。肯定自己并意识到自己有多么幸运，不是每一天都能完美，但是如果你留意，你会发现99.9%的时候你过得不错或过得很好。

　　6. Slacking on exercise. 懒于运动

　　You DO have enough time to exercise. If you say otherwise, you’re lying to yourself. The truth is you don’t have time not to, or sooner or later you’ll be making time for illness.

　　你有足够的时间去锻炼身体。如果你说没有，那是在自欺欺人。事实上，你现在没有时间去运动，过些日子你就有时间生病了。

　　At least 30 minutes of exercise every day has been proven on countless occasions by countless medical studies to increase the strength, happiness and longevity of human lives. You’re talking about three and a half hours a week. That’s hardly seems an excessive amount of time considering the tremendous benefits in terms of the impact on the remaining 164.5 hours of the week.

　　无数的医学研究证明，每天至少锻炼30分钟会增强体力、提升幸福感、延长寿命。每天30分钟，一周三个半小时。 想想你能在一周内剩下的那164.5小时获得的大量益处，这点儿时间绝不算多。

　　7. Overindulgence of a good thing.

　　过度沉迷于某件事物

　　Eating too much makes you fat. Spending too much money makes you broke. Working too much leaves your family at home missing you. Playing too much leaves important work undone… And so on and so forth.

　　吃得过多会让你发胖，花钱花得过多会让你破产，工作太多会让家人在家想念你，玩耍太多重要的事情就无法完成……这样的例子举不胜举。

　　Happiness depends on the balancing act of applying your positive resources equally to the hungry deficits in your life. All details aside, the important thing to remember is this: Long-term happiness is never found in one good thing; it is a combination, it is a balanced lifestyle.

　　快乐取决于你能否把积极的资源均等地分到生活中的赤字中以达到平衡。抛开细节不谈，重要的是要记住：长期的幸福不会在一件事情中找到;它是一种结合，是一种平衡的生活方式。
Don't try so hard to be respectable. Speak from your heart about what you truly believe, even if it makes you look naive or sentimental.

　　不要太用力去得到社会的认可。倾听你内心真正相信的东西，即使这会让你看起来天真或伤感。

　　You can radically change your life when/if you need to. You don't need to keep doing what you have been doing, just because you are in the habit of doing it.

　　你可以彻底改变你的生活，只要你想去改变。你不需要因为习惯了做一件事，就继续做下去。

　　Being friendly and open to meeting new people in random places can lead to cool adventures and friendships. Don't get too comfortable in your present circles of acquaintances.

　　对在任何地方遇到的陌生人都抱着开放和友好的态度，可能会给你带来炫酷的经历和友情。别太陷在你现在的熟人圈子里。

　　You need way less money than you think to survive, stop obsessing about it, and just spend less.

　　生活必需的钱比你想象得要少得多，不要迷恋钱，少花就是。

　　It's OK not to know what you want to do for the rest of your life. Leave space for the completely unexpected to happen.

　　你不知道自己余生想做什么也OK，刚好为完全未知的事情留出空间。

　　God loves you even more because you are a bit of a freak. Don't hide your light under a button-down bushel.

　　如果你有一点疯狂，上帝会更爱你的。千万不要掩藏你的才华。

　　Leave your door without any purpose once in a while and see where the city takes you. Don't just stay on the path between your apartment, work and the gym.

　　偶尔毫无目的地出去走走，看看你生活的城市能带你去哪儿。不要固定在家、公司、健身房三点之间。

　　Hang out with your long-time friends more and contact those with whom you have lost touch. You don't seem to have as many friends as you used to.

　　多多与多年老友碰面，重新找到失去联系的朋友。因为你会发现自己没原来那么多朋友了。

　　Ambition is overrated. Stop trying so hard to be "successful."

　　抱负被抬得过高。不要费劲全力只为了所谓的“成功”。

　　It's a good thing to believe that a Utopian society where everyone is treated with dignity and equality is possible and worth working for. Cynicism doesn't make you intelligent -- it just makes you cynical.

　　相信人人平等、有尊严的乌托邦社会可以实现，并愿为实现这一目标而努力是好事。但愤世嫉俗不会让你变聪明，只会让你变得愤世嫉俗。

　　Create art every once in a while. Even though you aren't particularly talented and nobody really loved your 'nude portrait under autumn leaves' the creative process is good for your soul.

　　偶尔搞搞艺术。就算你没有特别的才华，就算没有人欣赏你的“秋天落叶下的裸体自画像”，创造的过程也能美化你的灵魂。

　　The next time you hear yourself reminiscing about how you "used to do something," make a plan to do it. Studying dance, carving pumpkins for Halloween, and doing improve shouldn't all be thought of in the past tense.

　　下一次你再回忆起当年“做什么事”的时候，制定一个重新开始的计划吧。学跳舞、刻万圣节南瓜、即兴表演都不应该存在于过去式中。
What Are The Lessons People Most Often Learn Too Late In Life?

　　有哪些重要的事人们总是太晚才明白?

　　Just because you think its a good idea, doesn't mean it is a good idea.

　　只是因为你认为这是一个好主意，并不意味着这是一个好主意。

　　Be Careful What You Get Good At

　　对你擅长的事要小心。

　　Sacrificing your health to pursue wealth isn't worth it.

　　牺牲你的健康追求财富是不值得的。

　　Don't take your body for granted.

　　不要把你的身体当成理所当然。

　　Right and Wrong are subjective truths.

　　正确和错误都是主观的。

　　None of the best experiences of your life will happen staring a computer screen, a phone screen or a TV.

　　光是盯着电脑屏幕、手机屏幕或者电视是不可能体验生活的美好的。

　　Keep yourself strong because forever is a lie.

　　保持坚强，因为并没有所谓的“永远”。

　　All you need is enough energy to see tomorrow.

　　你唯一需要的是活到明天所需的能量。

　　Over-promise sets you apart from the people who under-promise. Over-deliver sets you apart from people who just delivered.

　　过度承诺使你从那些不能承诺的人中脱颖而出。给出比预期更好的结果则让你从那些仅仅完成任务的人中脱颖而出。

　　The secret of Happiness is to find out what you love and then directing all your energy towards doing it.

　　幸福的秘诀是找出你所爱的事，然后动用你所有的能量来做这件事。

　　Keep trying until you get it right.

　　继续尝试，直到你做对为止。

　　All our dreams can come true, if we have the courage to pursue them.

　　如果我们有勇气去追求，那我们所有的梦想都可以成真。

　　The only place where our dreams become IMPOSSIBLE is your thinking.

　　没有哪个梦想是不可能实现的，“不可能”都是你臆想出来的。

　　Make sure to wake up smarter tomorrow.

　　每天都要比昨天更聪明一点。

　　Don’t let words of mouth control you, take control of your life by yourself.

　　不要让别人的闲言碎语控制你，自己控制自己的人生。
In a cold winter, a couple had to move out from the luxury villa because of bankruptcy. The husband worked day and night to support the family but with no care of his wife. So she thought, "He doesn't love me any more, he just cares his business, not me".

　　一个寒冷的冬天，一对夫妇因为破产，不得不从豪宅里搬出。丈夫日夜辛勤工作以维持家庭开支，但没有时间关心妻子。于是，妻子暗自想道：“他不再爱我了，他只在乎他的个人事务，而不是我。”

　　One day, she began to take a bath, he stopped her at the door, "Let me take it first, okay?" "Why not let me shower first," she asked. "I was tired, sweetie, you take it later, okey?" She was totally depressed.

　　一天，妻子准备去洗澡，可丈夫在门口叫住了她，“让我先洗吧，好么?”“为什么不让我先洗呢?”“因为我很累，宝贝，你等下再洗吧，好么?”妻子对此情绪非常低落。

　　On a morose day, she found nothing to do and turned on his computer, a few words blurred her eyes- it was his diary:

　　一天，妻子无所事事，郁郁寡欢，于是她启动了丈夫的电脑。上面的几行字让她泪眼矇眬，她看到的是他的日记：

　　Today, I was quite sad, she asked me why I was always taking the bath first, and I said to her, I was exhausted. She was unhappy, in her mind, I treated her not as well as usual, but how can I do?

　　今天，我很悲伤，因为她问我，为什么总是我先洗澡，而我对她说，因为我太累了，想先洗。她心里不高兴，觉得我对她不像从前那么好了。但是我该怎么做呢?

　　I was not as rich as before! We moved to the small apartment, there was only a shower at the bathroom, it was so cold to take a shower in such a freezing winter. But I found that if one person took the shower first, the room could get a little warmer, so every time I rushed to the bathroom first. I was thinking that, when she took the shower, the room would get warmer, at least 1℃, 2℃ or 3℃........

　　我不像以前那么富有!我们搬到了一个小公寓，只有一个沐浴间，在如此寒冷的冬天洗澡真是冻死人了。但我发现，如果一个人先洗沐浴的话，浴室内就会暖和一些，所以每次我都第一个抢着去浴室。我想，等她进去浴室时，至少暖和一两度吧。

　　Now I can't give her comfortable life, bring her to the luxury restaurant, buy expensive dresses for her, but at least, I can give her "1℃" love.

　　现在，我不能给她舒适的生活，带她去高级餐厅，给她买漂亮的衣服，但至少我还能给她1摄氏度的爱情。

Beauty美丽人生

　　There were a sensitivity and a beauty to her that have nothing to do with looks. She was one to be listened to, whose words were so easy to take to heart.

　　她有着一种与外表无关的灵气和美丽。她的话语轻而易举地征服了人心，她正是我们要聆听的声音。

　　It is said that the true nature of being is veiled. The labor of words, the expression of art, the seemingly ceaseless buzz that is human thought all have in common the need to get at what really is so. The hope to draw close to and possess the truth of being can be a feverish one.

　　很多人都说人生的真谛是个未知的概念。言词的费力诠释、艺术的着力表现还有人类那似乎永无休止的纷繁思考，三者都苦苦追寻人生的真谛。

　　In some cases it can even be fatal, if pleasure is one's truth and its attainment more important than life itself. In other lives, though, the search for what is truthful gives life.

　　希望走近以至完全把握存在的真意可以令人十分狂热。有时候，有些人以自己笃信的真理为志趣，追寻真理甚于保全生命，于是就有舍生取义之举。然而，也有另外的一种人生，他们在寻求真谛的过程中灌溉生命。

　　I used to find notes left in the collection basket, beautiful notes about my homilies and about the writer's thoughts on the daily scriptural readings. The person who penned the notes would add reflections to my thoughts and would always include some quotes from poets and mystics he or she had read and remembered and loved. The notes fascinated me.

　　过去，我常常在教堂的心意篮里面发现一些优美的小短文，有些是关于我的布道，有些是作者日常读《圣经》的感想。写这些短文的人不仅对我的一些观点加以反思，同时还会引用一些他/她曾经读过的，令他/她难忘又喜爱的诗人或者神秘主义者的话。我给这些短文迷住了。

　　Here was someone immersed in a search for truth and beauty. Words had been treasured, words that were beautiful. And I felt as if the words somehow delighted in being discovered, for they were obviously very generous to the as yet anonymous writer of the notes. And now this person was in turn learning the secret of sharing them. Beauty so shines when given away.The only truth that exists is, in that sense, free.

　　我看到了一个执着于追寻真与美的人。其珍而重之的字句，优美动人。我还感觉到好像那些字句也乐于让我们发现，它们是那么毫无保留地，慷慨地为这无名氏作者借用，而现在轮到这位无名氏来学习与人分享这些美文的奥秘。分享令美愈加闪耀生辉，在这个意义上说，其实世上唯一的真理是分毫不费的。

　　It was a long time before I met the author of the notes.

　　过了很久我才见到这些短文的作者。

　　One Sunday morning, I was told that someone was waiting for me in the office. The young person who answered the rectory door said that it was "the woman who said she left all the notes." When I saw her I was shocked, since I immediately recognized her from church but had no idea that it was she who wrote the notes.

　　一个星期天早上，我被告知有人正在办公室等我。帮我应门的年轻人说“是个女人，说留言是她放的。”看见她的时候我大吃一惊，因为我马上就认出她是我的教区信徒，只是我一直不知道那些短文是她写的。

　　She was sitting in a chair in the office with her hands folded in her lap. Her head was bowed and when she raised it to look at me, she could barely smile without pain.

　　她坐在办公室的一张椅子上，两手相扣搁在大腿上，低垂着头。在抬头看我的时候，她微笑起来却十分费劲。

　　Her face was disfigured, and the skin so tight from surgical procedures that smiling or laughing was very difficult for her. She had suffered terribly from treatment to remove the growths that had so marred her face.

　　那是一张破了相的脸，外科手术使她的脸皮绷得紧紧的，笑对她来说也是很困难的。为了去除脸上碍眼的肉瘤她接受了手术治疗，这令她吃尽苦头。

　　We chatted for a while that Sunday morning and agreed to meet for lunch later that week.

　　那个星期天早上我们聊了一会儿，并决定那个星期再找个时间一起吃顿午饭。

　　As it turned out we went to lunch several times, and she always wore a hat during the meal. I think that treatments of some sort had caused a lot of her hair to fall out. We shared things about our lives.

　　后来我们不止吃了一顿午饭，而是好几顿。每次一起吃饭的时候她都戴着帽子。我想可能是她接受的某种治疗使她掉了不少头发。我们分享了各自生活中的点点滴滴。

　　I told her about my schooling and growing up. She told me that she had worked for years for an insurance company. She never mentioned family, and I did not ask.

　　我跟她讲我读书和成长的故事。她告诉我她在一家保险公司里已经工作多年了。她从来没有提过自己的家庭，我也没有问。

　　We spoke of authors we both had read, and it was easy to tell that books are a great love of hers.

　　我们还谈到大家都读过的作家作品，不难发现她非常喜欢看书。

　　I have thought about her often over the years and how she struggled in a society that places an incredible premium on looks, class, wealth and all the other fineries of life. She suffered from a disfigurement that cannot be made to look attractive. I know that her condition hurt her deeply.

　　这些年我经常想起她，在这个以外表、地位和财富等虚名浮利挂帅的社会中她是怎样一路挺过来的呢?毁掉的容颜使她怎么也无法变得耀眼迷人。我知道这深深地刺痛着她。

　　Would her life have been different had she been pretty? Chances are it would have. And yet there were a sensitivity and a beauty to her that had nothing to do with looks. She was one to be listened to, whose words were so easy to take to heart. Her words came from a wounded but loving heart, very much like all hearts, but she had more of a need to be aware of it, to live with it and learn from it. She possessed a fine-tuned sense of beauty. Her only fear in life was the loss of a friend.

　　如果她长得漂亮，她的生命轨迹会不会有所不同呢?有可能。不过她有种独特的灵气和美，与外表完全无关。她的话轻而易举地征服了人心，她正是我们要聆听的声音。她的隽语出于一颗受过伤却充满爱的心，就像所有人的心一样，只不过她比别人更注重对自己心灵的关注、用心去体会生活并从中学习。她拥有一种细腻的美感。她生命里唯一的恐惧就是失去朋友。

　　How long does it take most of us to reach that level of human growth, if we ever get there? We get so consumed and diminished, worrying about all the things that need improving, we can easily forget to cherish those things that last. Friendship, so rare and so good, just needs our care-maybe even the simple gesture of writing a little note now and then, or the dropping of some beautiful words in a basket, in the hope that such beauty will be shared and taken to heart.

　　我们究竟要花多长时间才能达到如此高度的成熟?能否最终达到还是个未知数呢。我们老觉得身心疲惫，怀才不遇，只顾为眼前的不足忧心忡忡，却忘了珍视一些历久常新的东西。友谊珍贵而美好，只需我们用心呵护，有时候简简单单的表示就已经足够了，譬如偶尔写几句话给朋友，或者在篮子里投入一些优美动人的字条，以期大家都能分享，记住美妙的时刻、美好的感觉。

　　The truth of her life was a desire to see beyond the surface for a glimpse of what it is that matters. She found beauty and grace and they befriended her, and showed her what is real.

　　她生命的真谛就是要透过事物的表面一睹其真正的本质。她发现了美和上帝的慈爱，而美和慈爱也待她如友，把生命的真谛呈现给她。
I Wanted to Change the World

　　我想改变世界

　　By Byron Pulsifer

　　——拜伦·普尔西弗

　　Change is one of the tough choices in life. How many times have you wanted to help someone else change their ways only to find that they keep moving on in the same direction and with the same behaviours and attitudes? You can present as manyrational arguments as you want but still the same old.

　　改变是人生中一个艰难的抉择。你有过多少次想要帮助别人改变他们的生活方式，但最后往往发现他们依旧保持一贯的行为方式和生活态度，沿着过去的生活轨迹继续前行?只要你愿意，你可以举出各式理性的依据，但是一切仍然是老样子。

　　rational adj. 合理的;理性的 n. 有理数

　　Take for example, a colleague at work who keeps doing the same job over and over again despite the need to adopt new ways, or more efficient ways to get the job done. What is the reason for this lack of adaptation?

　　举个例子，尽管一项工作需要采取新的或者更有效的方式来完成，一个职员却总是反复采用相同的工作方式。如何解释这种适应性的缺乏?

　　One reason may be that they are too set in a comfort zone because that is the way that has always worked for them and they know it cold. To ask them to adopt a new method of working requires them to move out of their comfort zone, and to take a risk that they might not be able to adopt the new procedure without making a mistake.

　　一种原因或许是他们太习惯于这个舒适区了，因为这就是他们一贯的工作方式，而且他们十分了解这种方式。如果想让他们采用一种新的工作方式，就需要他们走出舒适区，而且要冒一定的风险。因为他们或许不能在不犯错的情况下采用新的工作方式。

　　For several years, I worked in the social justice area and spoke to many hundreds if inmates in provincial prisons, and to inmates on their way to federal penitentiary. During these hundreds of conversations, one theme began to show over and over again. That theme was this: there was nothing I could say or do that would help them to change their life simply because they did not want to.

　　我在社会司法领域工作过几年，同成百上千的关押在省监狱或者即将转入联邦监狱的罪犯交谈过。在这么多次的谈话中，有一个主题反复出现：我不知道要说什么或者是做什么来帮助他们改变他们的人生，因为他们不想改变。

　　To make any kind of change, one has to have the will and determination to do it. There is only one who can do it and that is the person who is in charge of their own destiny.

　　不管是做何种改变，一个人首先必须有这种想要改变的愿望和决心。只有一个人可以做到，那个人就是掌控他们自己命运的人。

　　destiny n. 命运，定数，天命

　　The same applies to addicts of any sort. An addict can be sent to a detox centre but upon release, the only decision to get involved again with the addictive substance is the person.

　　同样的道理也适用于各种瘾君子。吸毒者可以被送到排毒中心。但是一旦被释放，能决定再次沾染毒品的只有他自己。

　　Each person has a choice; the choice to do as one may wish and as one wants remains with the individual. If a person sees no benefit to change, they will not change.

　　每个人都有自己的选择。这个按照一个人的意愿而做出的选择只属于那个人。如果一个人觉得改变不会给自己带来好处，那么他就不会选择改变。

　　Several years ago, I experienced a similar challenge with one of my staff members. There was a real need to change the way we conducted our service and I desperately needed everyone on board. Part of the issue with this particular person wasn’t that she did not understand the need to change, nor was it that she did not have the experience and knowledge to change.

　　几年前，我经历了一次类似的挑战。这次经历与我的一名工作人员有关。当时，我们开展服务的方式确实需要改变。我特别需要所有人都能参与这种改变。这个员工的问题既不是她不理解改变的必要性，也不是她没有改变所需要的经验和知识。

　　It was really a matter that she did not want to adapt because she had always done it the old way and saw no benefit to doing their particular service in a new way. So, my challenge was to find a special benefit to her so she would decide that to change would be of special benefit to her. In the end, I was able to speak privately with this staff member and outline a special benefit to her that would satisfy her to want to change.

　　她不想改变是因为她一直按照老方式工作，而且并没有看到新的工作方式给她带来的好处。所以，对我的挑战就是要找到特别的好处给她，这样她就会认识到改变对于她是有特殊的好处的。最后，我私下里跟她谈了一次，并把她愿意为之改变的好处讲给她听。

　　If you want to help someone change, they must first want to change. If they do not want to change it is the same thing as leading a horse to water. You can get the horse there but you can’t make them drink. The story below, which was written by an Unknown Monk, in 1100 A.D., reflects we can only change ourselves.

　　如果你想帮助别人改变，前提是他们想改变。如果他们不想改变，这就如同强马饮水。牵马到河易，强马饮水难。下面这个故事是一个不知名的僧侣在公元1100年写的。故事反映的道理是，我们只能改变我们自己。

　　When I was a young man, I wanted to change the world. I found it was difficult to change the world, so I tried to change my nation. When I found I couldn’t change the nation, I began to focus on my town. I couldn’t change the town and as an older man, I tried to change my family.

　　当我年轻的时候，我想改变世界。但我发现改变世界很难，因此我试着去改变我的国家。当我发现我也改变不了国家的时候，我开始想着要改变我居住的小镇。我也没能改变小镇。年纪大一些了，我尝试改变我的家人。

　　Now, as an old man, I realize the only thing I can change is myself, and suddenly I realize that if long ago I had changed myself, I could have made an impact on my family. My family and I could have made an impact on our town. Their impact could have changed the nation and I could indeed have changed the world.”

　　现在，我已然是一位老人。我才意识到我所能改变的只有我自己。我突然觉得如果很久之前就改变自己，我就可以影响到我的家人。我的家人和我就可以影响我的镇子。他们的影响力就可以改变国家，那样的话，我就真正改变了世界。
1. One is always on a strange road, watching strange scenery and listening to strange music. Then one day, you will find that the things you try hard to forget are already gone.

　　一个人总要走陌生的路，看陌生的风景，听陌生的歌，然后在某个不经意的瞬间，你会发现，原本是费尽心机想要忘记的事情真的就那么忘记了。

　　2. Happiness is not about being immortal nor having food or rights in one's hand. It’s about having each tiny wish come true, or having something to eat when you are hungry or having someone's love when you need love.

　　幸福，不是长生不老，不是大鱼大肉，不是权倾朝野。幸福是每一个微小的生活愿望达成。当你想吃的时候有得吃，想被爱的时候有人来爱你。

　　3. Love is a lamp, while friendship is the shadow. When the lamp is off, you will find the shadow everywhere. Friend is who can give you strength at last.

　　爱情是灯，友情是影子，当灯灭了，你会发现你的周围都是影子。朋友，是在最后可以给你力量的人。

　　4.I love you not for who you are, but for who I am before you.

　　我爱你不是因为你是谁，而是我在你面前可以是谁。

　　5.Love makes man grow up or sink down.

　　爱情，要么让人成熟，要么让人堕落。

　　6. If you can hold something up and put it down, it is called weight-lifting; if you can hold something up but can never put it down, it's called burden-bearing. Pitifully, most of people are bearing heavy burdens when they are in love.

　　举得起放得下的叫举重，举得起放不下的叫负重。可惜，大多数人的爱情，都是负重的。

　　7. We all live in the past. We take a minute to know someone, one hour to like someone, and one day to love someone, but the whole life to forget someone.

　　我们每个人都生活在各自的过去中，人们会用一分钟的时间去认识一个人，用一小时的时间去喜欢一个人，再用一天的时间去爱上一个人，到最后呢，却要用一辈子的时间去忘记一个人。

　　8. One may fall in love with many people during the lifetime. When you finally get your own happiness, you will understand the previous sadness is kind of treasure, which makes you better to hold and cherish the people you love.

　　一个人一生可以爱上很多的人，等你获得真正属于你的幸福之后，你就会明白一起的伤痛其实是一种财富，它让你学会更好地去把握和珍惜你爱的人。

　　9. When you are young, you may want several love experiences. But as time goes on, you will realize that if you really love someone, the whole life will not be enough. You need time to know, to forgive and to love. All this needs a very big mind.

　　年轻的时候会想要谈很多次恋爱，但是随着年龄的增长，终于领悟到爱一个人，就算用一辈子的时间，还是会嫌不够。慢慢地去了解这个人，体谅这个人，直到爱上为止，是需要有非常宽大的胸襟才行。

　　10. When tomorrow turns in today, yesterday, and someday that no more important in your memory, we suddenly realize that we r pushed forward by time. This is not a train in still in which you may feel forward when another train goes by. It is the truth that we've all grown up. And we become different.

　　当明天变成了今天成为了昨天，最后成为记忆里不再重要的某一天，我们突然发现自己在不知不觉中已被时间推着向前走，这不是静止火车里，与相邻列车交错时，仿佛自己在前进的错觉，而是我们真实的在成长，在这件事里成了另一个自己。

　　11.If you leave me, please don't comfort me because each sewing has to meet stinging pain.

　　离开我就别安慰我，要知道每一次缝补也会遭遇穿刺的痛。

　　12. Don’t forget the things you once you owned. Treasure the things you can’t get. Don't give up the things that belong to you and keep those lost things in memory.

　　曾经拥有的，不要忘记。不能得到的，更要珍惜。属于自己的，不要放弃。已经失去的，留作回忆。

　　13. I love and am used to keeping a distance with those changed things. Only in this way can I know what will not be abandoned by time. For example, when you love someone, changes are all around. Then I step backward and watching it silently, then I see the true feelings.

　　我喜欢并习惯了对变化的东西保持着距离，这样才会知道什么是最不会被时间抛弃的准则。比如爱一个人，充满变数，我于是后退一步，静静的看着，直到看见真诚的感情。

　　14. Men love from overlooking while women love from looking up. If love is a mountain, then if men go up, more women they will see while women will see fewer men.

　　男人的爱是俯视而生，而女人的爱是仰视而生。如果爱情像座山，那么男人越往上走可以俯视的女人就越多，而女人越往上走可以仰视的男人就越少。

　　15.Good love makes you see the whole world from one person while bad love makes you abandon the whole world for one person.

　　好的爱情是你通过一个人看到整个世界，坏的爱情是你为了一个人舍弃世界。

　　16. We shall always save a place for ourselves, only for ourselves. And then begin to love. Have no idea of what it is, who he is, how to love or how long it will be. Just wait for one love. Maybe no one will come out, but this kind of waiting is the love itself.

　　在自己面前，应该一直留有一个地方，独自留在那里。然后去爱。不知道是什么，不知道是谁，不知道如何去爱，也不知道可以爱多久。只是等待一次爱情，也许永远都没有人。可是，这种等待，就是爱情本身。

　　17. Is there anyone who hasn't suffered for the secret love? We always think that love is very heavy, heavy and could be the heaviest thing in the world. But one day, when you look back, you suddenly realize that it's always light, light. We all thought love was very deep, but in fact it's very thin. The deepest and heaviest love must grow up with the time.

　　有谁不曾为那暗恋而痛苦?我们总以为那份痴情很重，很重，是世上最重的重量。有一天，暮然回首，我们才发现，它一直都是很轻，很轻的。我们以为爱的很深，很深，来日岁月，会让你知道，它不过很浅，很浅。最深和最重的爱，必须和时日一起成长。

　　18.In this world, only those men who really feel happy can give women happiness

　　在这个世界上，只有真正快乐的男人，才能带给女人真正的快乐。

　　19. If a woman is not sexy, she needs emotion; if she is not emotional, she needs reason; if she is not reasonable, she has to know herself clearly. coz only she has is misfortune.

　　女人如果不性感，就要感性;如果没有感性，就要理性;如果没有理性，就要有自知之明;如果连这个都没有了，她只有不幸。

　　20. I know someone in the world is waiting for me, although I've no idea of who he is. But I feel happy every day for this.

　　我知道这世上有人在等我，但我不知道我在等谁，为了这个，我每天都非常快乐。

　　21. In your life, there will at least one time that you forget yourself for someone, asking for no result, no company, no ownership nor love. Just ask for meeting you in my most beautiful years.

　　一生至少该有一次，为了某个人而忘了自己，不求有结果，不求同行，不求曾经拥有，甚至不求你爱我。只求在我最美的年华里，遇到你。

　　22.I don't think that when people grow up, they will become more broad-minded and can accept everything. Conversely, I think it's a selecting process, knowing what's the most important and what's the least. And then be a simple man.

　　我不觉得人的心智成熟是越来越宽容涵盖，什么都可以接受。相反，我觉得那应该是一个逐渐剔除的过程，知道自己最重要的是什么，知道不重要的东西是什么。而后，做一个纯简的人。

　　23. When you feel hurt and your tears are gonna to drop. Please look up and have a look at the sky once belongs to us. If the sky is still vast, clouds are still clear, you shall not cry because my leave doesn't take away the world that belongs to you.

　　当你的心真的在痛，眼泪快要流下来的时候，那就赶快抬头看看，这片曾经属于我们的天空;当天依旧是那么的广阔，云依旧那么的潇洒，那就不应该哭，因为我的离去，并没有带走你的世界。
　I have 422 friends, yet I am lonely. I speak to all of them every day, yet none of them really know me.

　　我有422个朋友，但我依旧孤独。我每天跟他们所有人说话，但他们没有一人真正了解我。

　　The problem I have sits in the spaces between, looking into their eyes, or at a name on a screen.

　　我的问题在于是要看着他们的双眼，还是屏幕上的名字。

　　I took a step back, and opened my eyes, I looked around, and then realized that this media we call social is anything but when we open our computers, and it's our doors we shut.

　　我后退一步，睁开双眼，环顾四周，发现这个我们称作社交的媒体一点也不具备社交性，当我们打开电脑时，我们就关上了那道门。

　　All this technology we have, it's just an illusion, community companionship, a sense of inclusion,

　　我们所拥有的科技只是一种暗示，社群，友谊，包容的感觉，

　　yet when you step away from this device of delusion, you awaken to see, a world of confusion.

　　然而，当你离开这个充满幻想的设备，你会忽然惊觉面前的世界充满疑惑。

　　A world where we're slaves to the technology we mastered, where our information gets sold by some rich greedy bastard.

　　在这个世界，我们被我们精通的科技所奴役，资讯被某些富有贪婪的混蛋出卖。

　　A world of self-interest, self-image, self-promotion, where we share all our best bits, but leave out the emotion.

　　在这个世界，到处充斥着个人利益、个人形象、个人推广，我们全都分享我们最好的一面，但将情绪抛诸脑后。

　　We are at our most happy with an experience we share, but is it the same if no one is there?

　　我们乐于分享某次经历，但如果没人携伴，快乐是否依旧?

　　Being alone isn't the problem, let me just emphasize, that if you read a book, paint a picture, or do some exercise, you are being productive, and present,

　　孤独并不是个问题，让我再强调一下，如果你读本书、画幅画、或做些运动，你的生活是丰富多彩且活在当下的，

　　not reserved or recluse, you're being awake and attentive, and putting your time to good use.

　　不是沉默且孤僻的。你正清醒且全心投入，并有效利用你的时间。

　　So when you're in public, and you start to feel alone, put your hands behind your head, and step away from the phone.

　　所以当你处在公共场合，开始感到孤单的时候，就将你的双手放在脑后，远离手机。
Many years ago, a baby boy came into this world. But unfortunately, he didn't come with a cry, which was a big problem from the medical point of view. The doctor, tough and quick, turned the baby upside down and slapped his bottom sharply. The baby cried, and he survived. At that moment, the father yelled at the doctor, "Why did you hit my baby?" He did not realize that the doctor had saved the baby's life. The baby cried and cried, and the father smiled and silently cried as well. He held the baby in his arms and did not allow the doctor to touch the baby anymore...

　　很多年前，一个男婴来到了这个世界。但遗憾的是他没有“呱呱落地”，从医学角度来说，这是一个很大的问题!好在医生现场反应很快，也很强悍，一下子把男婴倒提起来，对着屁股一阵狂打。男婴终于哭了，脱离了生命危险。当时在场的孩子父亲不干了，对着医生吼道，“你为什么打我的孩子啊?”他并没有意识到医生救了这孩子的命。男婴不停地哭，这位父亲面带微笑，高兴地默默流泪。他紧紧地把婴儿抱在怀里，再也没有让医生碰一下这个孩子……

　　Contest chair, ladies and gentlemen, that baby was me, and that man was my dad. Whenever my mom told people this story, I would always laugh aloud, and my dad would just shake his head and smile quietly.

　　大会主持人，女士们先生们，那个婴儿就是我，那个男的就是我老爸。每当妈告诉别人这个故事时，我总会放声大笑，而老爸则会一边摇头一边默默地微笑。

　　Dad never tried to hug or kiss me when I was a child. And of course, he never said "I love you" to me, either. Maybe it's a Chinese cultural thing, or maybe that's the way my dad was. But whenever I felt defeated, sad or lonely, dad was always there. Dad was a man of few words, but I always liked to talk to him, and I could always feel a very special connection to him.

　　我小的时候爸从来不抱我，从来不亲我，当然他也从来不说“我爱你”这三个字。也许这是中国文化的问题，也许爸就是这种人。但每当我受挫、伤心或孤独无助时，爸总会在默默地关心我。老爸话不多，但我总喜欢有什么话都给他说，同是我也总是能感到和老爸之间那种无法言喻的特殊关系。

　　As I got older, I had a huge crush on a girl. She was tall and beautiful, with long hair. One day, I walked up to her and blurted out, "you are so beautiful baby. I love you so much. Please be my wife!" She was afraid and ran away with tears in her eyes. She told my teacher, and my teacher was so angry that she made me stay after school, and called my dad to take me home. My first love was over, and that year I was 7 years old.

　　等我大一些的时候我疯狂爱上了一个女孩子。她又高又漂亮，还有一头长发。终于有一天，我忍不住了，走到她面前，很快地说道，“亲爱的，你太漂亮了!我太爱你了!做我老婆吧!”没想到她吓坏了，抹着眼泪跑掉了，然后就告诉了老师。老师当时非常生气，放学后没让我回家，并给老爸打电话，让他过来领人。我的初恋就这样夭折了，那年我七岁……

　　On the way home, dad was very quiet. It seemed that nothing had happened. Finally I broke the silence and asked him, "Daddy, did I do something wrong?" Dad paused for a while as he always did and said quietly, "Son, you did nothing wrong, except that it's too early for you to pursue girls." "Daddy, do you think I could marry a tall and beautiful girl with long hair when I grow up?" I asked. Dad gave me one of his rare laughs and said, "Of course you could. You are so handsome! Just like your handsome father." For the first time, I realized that dad had a sense of humor, although he was always quiet.
To me, the concept of home changes continually along with my age.

　　对于我来说，家的概念随着年龄的变化而不断变化。

　　In my childhood, home was a string of calls. It seems that I was entitled to more freedom than today's children. I didn't have to show up in front of my parents right after school, instead I would go to play with my classmates who lived in the neighborhood. We frolicked like mad until dinner was ready and our parents called "Come back! Come home for supper!" Days passed by as I grew up in the company of those calls. Even now the ringing voices are still echoing in my ears.

　　在童年的时候，家是一声声呼唤。那时的我似乎比今日的孩子拥有更多的自由。放学后不会先在父母前露面，而是与住的相邻的同学聚在一起，天马行空，玩的天昏地暗，直到炊烟散去，听见父母“喂，回家了，吃饭了”的呼唤才回家，这样的声音伴着我慢慢长大，日复一日，至今仍在我的耳旁回响。

　　In a wink, my childhood was gone. When a thin layer of hair began to grow around the corners of my mouth, home became a place I tried to escape from.

　　一转眼，童年过去了，当胡须慢慢从嘴角长出，家又成了一个想逃的地方。

　　As I read more and more, my world opened up, presenting a broader picture before me. The bed I used to sleep in became too small, and words of care from my parents began to sound superfluous. How I wished I could have a space of my own someday! Later I was enlisted into the army and put on the green uniform. During my service days, home was the series of letters I received one after another. My most homesick moments were when I read those letters from my family.

　　书看多了，世界也变大了，一张床小了，父母的叮咛也显得多余了，盼望着什么时候我能拥有自己的天空?后来，穿上了绿色的军装，来到了部队，家又变成了一封封信笺，每次收到信后，是最想家的时候。

　　When I got a job, I began to get "hurt", to rise and fall in a sea of people, and to understand that you can't share all your pains with other people, even with your best friends. So again, another wave of homesickness came over me. When I was badly hurt, I imagined myself flying home on wings. Pushing open the door, I let tears flow down my face. At that moment I felt that as large as the world was, what I needed was only the familiar smell of home and the unchanged view outside the window of my old house…

　　走上了工作岗位之后，开始“受伤”，开始在人海中翻腾，开始知道，有些疼痛无法对人说，甚至知心的朋友。于是，重新开始想家。当受了“重伤”时，幻想着飞到远方的家中，在推开家门的一瞬，让自己泪流满面。此刻，世界很大，而我所需要的，只是家中那种熟悉的味道，那窗前一成不变的风景……

　　Struggling for mere existence in a place far from my mother, I was often at a loss what to do after work and on the weekend. Picking up a thick telephone book, I leafed through it from cover to cover but found not a single number I could call. At this time home appeared in my mind as a cozy nest I yearned to build with another person.

　　远离母亲，在外省生存，工作之余便有无数个周末无处打发，手中的电话本很厚，从头翻到尾，却没有一个号码是为我此时准备的。这个时候，家又变成了自己要和另外一个人建立的那一个新的小家。

　　From dating to engagement, we finally fell into each other's arms and decided to step into marriage. Thus on an ordinary day we formed an ordinary family. Then the concept of home changed again: it became the light left on for you when you return late at night; the peacefulness in which you occasionally exchange words, one reading a book, the other watching TV; and a place where you can entertain friends and use foul langue when you feel elated.

　　从相识、相恋到相拥，一个平凡的日子里，我拥有了一个平凡的小家。此时，家的概念又变了，它是深夜回家时那盏为你点起的灯，是傍晚你看看书我看看电视偶尔交谈几句的那种宁静，是一桌胃口不好时也吃得下的饭菜，是得意忘形时可以呼朋唤友可以张口粗话的地方。

　　Not long ago I became a father. When I greeted into my family the birth of a new life, an odd sensation welled up in my heart. The little creature obsessed me so much that though I tried to get rid of it I only found myself all the more indulging myself with it. That is a kind of force that binds you with a sense of happiness.

　　不久前，我成了父亲，我和一个新的生命在家中相逢，一种奇妙的感受充斥着我的心，小生命开始让我“玩物丧志”，想挣脱却又那么愿意沉溺其中，一种用幸福来缚住你的力量。

　　The concept of home kept changing as my life hurried along. Among them any definitions I gave to it, there is one which relates to grief. I remember, for instance, how my father's early death led me to understand all the injuries inflicted by the world added together are sometimes less devastating than a single misfortune in your family. However, you may also feel a kind of strength in your family. After my father's death, my mother, who used to be quiet and gentle, became strong and indomitable. She led my brother and me out of our misery and we got back on our feet again. Tranquility came back to my home, where happiness reigned as before. In retrospect, I can compare home to an unyielding plant: it may be burnt down by wildfire, but it will sprout again when the spring breeze blows.

　　家的概念在不停地变换着，生命在这种变换中匆匆地走着。众多的概念中，家有时也意味着一种悲伤。比如当年父亲的辞世，便让我知道，世界对你的伤害加在一起有时也不如家中的变故给你的伤害大。然而在家中，你也会感受到一种坚强，比如父亲过世后，柔弱的母亲开始变得坚强，她带着我们哥俩，一步一步地从变故中走出，之后，家又重新“站立”了起来，又变得祥和，变得不再阴云密布。在这个过程中，家又像是一种生命力顽强的植物：野火烧不尽，春风吹又生。

　　Although I already have much life experience behind me, I know there is still a long way ahead and my concept of home will go on evolving. But already I have come to see that home is where we can find the true meaning of all the hectic rush of life. What makes the concept different is that sometimes it refers to an individual's home and sometimes to the home of many, many people.

　　生命起步虽久，前路却还遥远。家的概念还会变换，然而我已经知道，家是奔波的意义，只是这家有时是自己的，有时是芸芸众生的。
Every girl is a treasure but way too often we forget how precious they are.

　　每个女孩都是件珍宝，只是我们常常忘了自己有多珍贵。

　　I put together a list of 10 things that all girls should remember in order to stay balanced, grounded and amazing as we are born to be。

　　我整理了一张清单，列出10件所有女孩应该记住的事，它们能让我们回归女性的平衡、稳定和精彩。

　　1. You are beautiful

　　你很美丽

　　Every girl deserves to shine in this world, inside and out. Don't let anything or anyone let you doubt how beautiful you are because you are a gem like no other。

　　每个女孩都应活得神采飞扬，无论内心还是外在。别让任何事、任何人使你质疑自己的美丽，因为你本就是块独一无二的珍宝。

　　2. You are strong

　　你很坚强

　　Life sometimes seems too hard and difficult to understand but no matter what obstacles are standing in your way right now you have the power to overcome them. Sometimes your strength lies in stubbornness and determination but even more often it is hidden in your ability to go around obstacles and learn from the previous mistakes. Be strong as a fire that crushes everything in its way and like water that finds a way around any obstacle with gentle determination and a peaceful flow。

　　有时生活既艰难，又难懂，但无论你面对着怎样的障碍，都要记住你有跨越它们的能力。有时候力量源自你的固执和决绝，但更多的时候，吸取以前的教训，聪明地绕过障碍是你潜在的更大力量。要像火一样勇猛无畏，歼灭一切眼前障碍;更要像水一样具有柔中带刚的力量，安静地绕过挫折，获得胜利。

　　3. You are THE BEST at being yourself

　　做自己的时候最棒

　　You have unique gifts and talents that no one else in this world has. Sometimes we feel that we need to be someone else in order to fit in, and be an image that we believe everyone else will love. No matter how hard you try to be someone else you will never be good enough. You will do the best and be the happiest only if you stop living by someone else's standards and start using your unique potential to shine like a light in this world。

　　你拥有这世上独一无二的天赋。有时我们会觉得：为了更好融入这世界，我们得扮成别人，或是扮演我们认为人人都会喜欢的形象。然而，无论你多努力，也永远当不了完美的“别人”。只有抛开别人的标准，挖掘自己的潜力，你才能成为最好、最快乐的自己。

　　4. You deserve being taken care of and cherished

　　你值得被珍惜

　　We spend a big part of our lives trying to make others like us. The truth is that no one will ever like you if you don’t start loving yourself first. Give your love to others like you do every day already but don’t forget to leave some for yourself. Spend some time reading your favorite book and exercising. You will be a better one!

　　在一生中，我们花了许多力气来让别人喜欢我们。而事实上，如果不自爱，别人亦不会爱你。对他人付出的同时，也请记得留一些给自己。花点时间去读书、锻炼吧，你将会成为更好的自己!

　　5. You are rich。

　　你很富有

　　True wealth comes from within. Of course, money matters but so does the way you spend and treat it. If money is the only purpose of your life then you will never feel rich even if you become a millionaire. Treat money the way it was meant to – as means to existence rather than the ultimate source of happiness and joy. Right now write down 5 things that make you a rich person and keep this list where you will always see it。

　　真正的富有来自内心。钱很重要，但你对待金钱的方式也很重要。假如赚钱是你生活的唯一目标，那即使成为百万富翁，你也不会觉得开心。把钱看成是维持生存的工具吧，而不是能带来快乐和幸福的源泉。现在开始，写下5件能让你觉得自己很富有的事，并把这张纸贴在醒目的地方。

　　6. You deserve pursuing your passion

　　你有追逐梦想的权利

　　Your passion is the integral part of you, the minute you lose it you will start losing yourself. Did you ever feel that you hardly even remember the girl you were when you were 16? What gave you that enthusiastic drive to pursue your goals and dreams?

　　梦想使你完整。一旦失去它你便将失去自己。是不是偶尔会觉得，你已经不记得自己16岁时的模样了?那时候的自己，为什么总可以这么开心?是什么东西给了你热情，让你有动力去追逐自己的梦想和人生?

　　No matter how many years passed since you were 16, that girl still lives inside of you. Even though today you have responsibilities, chores and THE schedule you still need to make room for your passion。

　　无论你距离16岁有多遥远，那个小女孩其实仍然存活在你心中。虽然现在的你可能背负着各种责任和义务，但你仍旧该为梦想留存着位置。

　　7. Your sensitivity is your biggest power

　　敏感正是你最强大的武器

　　You are delicate as a flower and you need love to survive. Don’t be afraid to show your weakness every once in a while and let your loved ones help you. Your power lies in multiplying the love and care that you receive and spreading it in the world around you。

　　你如花朵般娇弱，需要爱的滋养。不要拒绝偶尔的示弱，让你爱的人来帮助你吧。将收到的关爱加倍扩散到整个世界，这是你最大的能力。

　　8. You are courageous

　　你很勇敢

　　Living a full life means being bold and courageous in order to protect what you stand for and aspire for your biggest dreams. Every day we face choices and the course your life is taking depends greatly on how courageous you are when making decisions. Don't settle for the easiest choice but rather use your courage to live a bold and full life。

　　过充实的人生意味着你将变得勇敢无畏，来保护自己坚持的东西，追寻自己的梦。我们每天都面对着挑战，你面对选择时有多大的勇气决定了你能过怎样的人生。不要贪图安逸，勇敢地去过想要的充实人生吧。

　　9. You are perfect

　　你很完美

　　You are the masterpiece of perfection as long as you let your inner light shine and knowhow invaluable you are。

　　只要你的内心还存有微光，只要你始终明白自己有多珍贵，你就是上帝最完美的杰作。

　　10. You are what you want to be

　　你就是你想成为的自己

　　Our deepest wishes are whispers of our authentic selves. We must learn to respect them. We must learn to listen。

　　我们心中最深刻的愿望就是内心真实自我的呼声。我们需要学习尊重和倾听内心的声音
1. One is always on a strange road, watching strange scenery and listening to strange music. Then one day, you will find that the things you try hard to forget are already gone.

　　1.一个人总要走陌生的路，看陌生的风景，听陌生的歌，然后在某个不经意的瞬间，你会发现，原本是费尽心机想要忘记的事情真的就那么忘记了。

　　2. Happiness is not about being immortal nor having food or rights in one's hand. It’s about having each tiny wish come true, or having something to eat when you are hungry or having someone's love when you need love.

　　2.幸福，不是长生不老，不是大鱼大肉，不是权倾朝野。幸福是每一个微小的生活愿望达成。当你想吃的时候有得吃，想被爱的时候有人来爱你。

　　3. Love is a lamp, while friendship is the shadow. When the lamp is off, you will find the shadow everywhere. Friend is who can give you strength at last.

　　3.爱情是灯，友情是影子，当灯灭了，你会发现你的周围都是影子。朋友，是在最后可以给你力量的人。

　　4.I love you not for who you are, but for who I am before you.

　　4.我爱你不是因为你是谁，而是我在你面前可以是谁。

　　5.Love makes man grow up or sink down.

　　5.爱情，要么让人成熟，要么让人堕落。

　　6. If you can hold something up and put it down, it is called weight-lifting; if you can hold something up but can never put it down, it's called burden-bearing. Pitifully, most of people are bearing heavy burdens when they are in love.

　　6.举得起放得下的叫举重，举得起放不下的叫负重。可惜，大多数人的爱情，都是负重的。

　　7. We all live in the past. We take a minute to know someone, one hour to like someone, and one day to love someone, but the whole life to forget someone.

　　7.我们每个人都生活在各自的过去中，人们会用一分钟的时间去认识一个人，用一小时的时间去喜欢一个人，再用一天的时间去爱上一个人，到最后呢，却要用一辈子的时间去忘记一个人。

　　8. One may fall in love with many people during the lifetime. When you finally get your own happiness, you will understand the previous sadness is kind of treasure, which makes you better to hold and cherish the people you love.

　　8.一个人一生可以爱上很多的人，等你获得真正属于你的幸福之后，你就会明白一起的伤痛其实是一种财富，它让你学会更好地去把握和珍惜你爱的人。

　　9. When you are young, you may want several love experiences. But as time goes on, you will realize that if you really love someone, the whole life will not be enough. You need time to know, to forgive and to love. All this needs a very big mind.

　　9.年轻的时候会想要谈很多次恋爱，但是随着年龄的增长，终于领悟到爱一个人，就算用一辈子的时间，还是会嫌不够。慢慢地去了解这个人，体谅这个人，直到爱上为止，是需要有非常宽大的胸襟才行。

　　10. When tomorrow turns in today, yesterday, and someday that no more important in your memory, we suddenly realize that we r pushed forward by time. This is not a train in still in which you may feel forward when another train goes by. It is the truth that we've all grown up. And we become different.

　　10.当明天变成了今天成为了昨天，最后成为记忆里不再重要的某一天，我们突然发现自己在不知不觉中已被时间推着向前走，这不是静止火车里，与相邻列车交错时，仿佛自己在前进的错觉，而是我们真实的在成长，在这件事里成了另一个自己。

　　11.If you leave me, please don't comfort me because each sewing has to meet stinging pain.

　　11.离开我就别安慰我，要知道每一次缝补也会遭遇穿刺的痛。

　　12. Don’t forget the things you once you owned. Treasure the things you can’t get. Don't give up the things that belong to you and keep those lost things in memory.

　　12.曾经拥有的，不要忘记。不能得到的，更要珍惜。属于自己的，不要放弃。已经失去的，留作回忆。

　　13. I love and am used to keeping a distance with those changed things. Only in this way can I know what will not be abandoned by time. For example, when you love someone, changes are all around. Then I step backward and watching it silently, then I see the true feelings.

　　13.我喜欢并习惯了对变化的东西保持着距离，这样才会知道什么是最不会被时间抛弃的准则。比如爱一个人，充满变数，我于是后退一步，静静的看着，直到看见真诚的感情。

　　14. Men love from overlooking while women love from looking up. If love is a mountain, then if men go up, more women they will see while women will see fewer men.

　　14.男人的爱是俯视而生，而女人的爱是仰视而生。如果爱情像座山，那么男人越往上走可以俯视的女人就越多，而女人越往上走可以仰视的男人就越少。

　　15.Good love makes you see the whole world from one person while bad love makes you abandon the whole world for one person.

　　15.好的爱情是你通过一个人看到整个世界，坏的爱情是你为了一个人舍弃世界。

　　16. We shall always save a place for ourselves, only for ourselves. And then begin to love. Have no idea of what it is, who he is, how to love or how long it will be. Just wait for one love. Maybe no one will come out, but this kind of waiting is the love itself.

　　16.在自己面前，应该一直留有一个地方，独自留在那里。然后去爱。不知道是什么，不知道是谁，不知道如何去爱，也不知道可以爱多久。只是等待一次爱情，也许永远都没有人。可是，这种等待，就是爱情本身。

　　17. Is there anyone who hasn't suffered for the secret love? We always think that love is very heavy, heavy and could be the heaviest thing in the world. But one day, when you look back, you suddenly realize that it's always light, light. We all thought love was very deep, but in fact it's very thin. The deepest and heaviest love must grow up with the time.

　　17.有谁不曾为那暗恋而痛苦?我们总以为那份痴情很重，很重，是世上最重的重量。有一天，暮然回首，我们才发现，它一直都是很轻，很轻的。我们以为爱的很深，很深，来日岁月，会让你知道，它不过很浅，很浅。最深和最重的爱，必须和时日一起成长。

　　18.In this world, only those men who really feel happy can give women happiness

　　18.在这个世界上，只有真正快乐的男人，才能带给女人真正的快乐。

　　19. If a woman is not sexy, she needs emotion; if she is not emotional, she needs reason; if she is not reasonable, she has to know herself clearly. coz only she has is misfortune.

　　19.女人如果不性感，就要感性;如果没有感性，就要理性;如果没有理性，就要有自知之明;如果连这个都没有了，她只有不幸。

　　20. I know someone in the world is waiting for me, although I've no idea of who he is. But I feel happy every day for this.

　　20.我知道这世上有人在等我，但我不知道我在等谁，为了这个，我每天都非常快乐。

　　21. In your life, there will at least one time that you forget yourself for someone, asking for no result, no company, no ownership nor love. Just ask for meeting you in my most beautiful years.

　　21.一生至少该有一次，为了某个人而忘了自己，不求有结果，不求同行，不求曾经拥有，甚至不求你爱我。只求在我最美的年华里，遇到你。

　　22.I don't think that when people grow up, they will become more broad-minded and can accept everything. Conversely, I think it's a selecting process, knowing what's the most important and what's the least. And then be a simple man.

　　22.我不觉得人的心智成熟是越来越宽容涵盖，什么都可以接受。相反，我觉得那应该是一个逐渐剔除的过程，知道自己最重要的是什么，知道不重要的东西是什么。而后，做一个纯简的人。

　　23. When you feel hurt and your tears are gonna to drop. Please look up and have a look at the sky once belongs to us. If the sky is still vast, clouds are still clear, you shall not cry because my leave doesn't take away the world that belongs to you.

　　23.当你的心真的在痛，眼泪快要流下来的时候，那就赶快抬头看看，这片曾经属于我们的天空;当天依旧是那么的广阔，云依旧那么的潇洒，那就不应该哭，因为我的离去，并没有带走你的世界。
One thing you simply cannot ignore about your relationship is that there is another person in your life. Your partner is someone you have to care for, think about regularly, support and comfort.

　　在恋爱中有件不可忽视的事，就是在你的生活中还有另外一个人。这个人需要你关心、想念、支持和安慰。

　　If you are not fulfilling these duties, your partner will feel neglected and hurt. Relationships can feel strained when you are neither confident in yourself nor feel personal self-worth.

　　如果你没有做到这些，你的另一半会感觉到被忽视和受伤。如果你既不自信也感觉不到自己的价值，那么你们的爱情就会变得岌岌可危。

　　This is when you might feel overly dependent on a relationship, have low self-esteem and experience anxiety.

　　这时你在恋爱中会感觉极度依赖、自卑、焦虑。

　　So, what can you do when you feel yourself slipping into this pattern of emotional outbursts, self-doubt and dependency? Take time to self-reflect on your own life goals and ambitions.

　　那么，当你感觉自己的这种情绪爆发、并自我怀疑、过分依赖时该怎么办呢?花些时间反省一下你自己的生活目标和理想吧。

　　If tomorrow your partner was out of the equation, would you still feel content in the other areas of your life? If your goal is to look and feel healthier, set aside the time to exercise, meditate and eat well.

　　如果明天你的伴侣离你而去，你是否仍然能从生活的其他方面得到满足?如果你的目标是要看起来并感觉更健康，就留出时间去锻炼、冥想、健康饮食。

　　If your goal is to switch jobs, start meeting with recruiters and networking. Making strides in your own life will allow you to be more present for someone else.

　　如果你的目标是换工作，那就开始和招聘人员会面交流、多参加社交活动。在生活中大有进步会使你在别人面前看起来更与时俱进。

　　Feeling emotionally dependent on your partner is comparable to that dreadful feeling of heartbreak when a relationship collapses.

　　情感上过于依赖另一半，其伤害程度不亚于分手时心碎的可怕感觉。

　　That pressure you experience on your chest feels permanent, you feel confused and overwhelmed. You constantly feel hopeless and alone, even when your partner is in the room.

　　你胸口所感受到的压力好像一直存在，你会感到困惑、不知所措。甚至当你的伴侣在房间里时，你也会不断地感到绝望、孤单。

　　It is as if nothing anyone says or does is enough. This is because nothing anyone does can give you enough unless you feel love for yourself.

　　就好像任何人说什么做什么都不足以让你感觉好起来，这是因为除非你自己感受到爱，否则任何人做的任何事都不能给你足够的温暖。

　　Your relationship will improve when you emit confidence and positive energy. When you feel valuable, it draws people in closer. When you feel down, depressed and low about yourself, it automatically drives people away.

　　当你散发出自信和正能量时你们的关系才会好转。你感受到自我价值，才会吸引别人更靠近你。在你情绪低落、沮丧、消沉的时候，人们也会自动地远离你。

　　You can even do an experiment in your own relationship. Next time you feel elated or proud of yourself, observe how your partner acts toward you. I guarantee you will notice a difference.

　　你甚至可以用自己的恋爱做一个试验。下次你欢欣鼓舞、骄傲自豪的时候，观察一下你的伴侣是如何对待你的，保证你会发现不同之处。

　　It is important to note that it is okay and healthy to somewhat rely on your partner, as you are a team and should work through issues together.

　　有一点需要注意的是，稍微依赖一点你的伴侣是可以的，也是明智的，因为你们是一个团队，应该一起解决问题。

　　When you are upset, angry or feel self-conscious, it is part of your partner’s job description to help support you as best as he or she can.

　　当你沮丧、生气或不自在的时候，他/她应该尽其所能去支持你。

　　Not only is it the obligation of your partner, but it should also be a role he or she is more than happy to play. If you can’t rely on your partner to a certain degree, how can it be considered a loving relationship? You are basically friends with benefits.

　　这不仅是他/她的责任，也应该是他/她更乐意去做的。如果在某种程度上你不能依赖你的伴侣，那你们之间怎么能称之为相爱的关系呢?你们仅仅是利益之交罢了。

　　When you are in a relationship, it is okay to be vulnerable because you know your partner will be there for you and will not turn away when you are at your lowest.

　　你在恋爱中可以脆弱，因为你知道你的另一半会陪在你身边，当你处于低谷时也不会离你而去。

　　So, how can we better understand this relationship? Think of it like this: First, you are happy on your own. You feel comfortable in your own skin and confident about your ambitions and goals.

　　所以，我们怎样才能更好地理解这段关系?这样来想一下：首先，你自己要快乐。要对自己的状态释然，并且对自己的理想和目标有信心。

　　Now, your partner enters into the picture. There is certainly an adjustment period, where you learn how to expose your inner thoughts and depend on someone other than yourself.

　　然后，你的伴侣进入了你的世界。当然会有一段调整期，你要学会表达内心的想法并依靠除你之外的那个人。

　　After a while, you should feel even more comfortable in our own skin and more ambitious and goal oriented. It should be the cherry on top of your already-delicious sundae.

　　一段时间之后，你应该会感觉更释然，更雄心勃勃，目标也更明确。对你来说这应该是锦上添花。

　　If you start from there, you will have a healthy foundation on which to build a mutually-supportive relationship.

　　如果在此之上建立关系，那么你会在一个健康的基础上去建立一段相互扶持的关系。

　　Ideally, your partner, whom you love and care about, will ride alongside you on your path to success. In turn, you will support your partner to fulfill his or her own life ambitions.

　　情况理想的话，那个你爱着、关心着的伴侣会随你一起迈向成功。反过来，你也会支持你的另一半去实现他/她的生活抱负。

摘  要
大型钢结构（如桥梁主体、船舶分段等）作为国家关键基础设施的重要组成，其焊接质量与效率直接影响重大工程建设的进度与安全性。传统人工焊接不仅劳动强度大、作业环境恶劣，而且存在效率低、焊缝质量不稳定等问题，推动焊接过程的自动化与智能化已成为制造业发展的迫切需求。在此背景下，多机器人协同焊接技术凭借其高并行性、高柔性和高作业效率，展现出在大型结构件焊接中的广阔应用前景。然而，将多机器人系统应用于结构复杂、空间受限的大型钢结构焊接，仍面临一系列关键技术瓶颈：如何在复杂三维空间内为多机械臂规划出满足焊接工艺约束且完全无碰撞的可行路径，以及如何保证多机器人系统在长时间焊接作业中具备应对动态扰动（如工件热变形、位姿误差）的鲁棒性和实时协同能力。
针对上述挑战，本文提出了一种面向大型钢结构的双机械臂协同焊接控制方法。首先，基于D-H参数建立机械臂运动学预测模型，通过雅可比矩阵实现末端轨迹到关节速度的映射，将焊接工艺约束（包括焊枪姿态、焊接速度稳定性和焊接顺序要求）整合到MPC优化框架中，实现末端轨迹跟踪与关节空间约束的统一优化。其次，针对复杂焊接环境设计了分层规划与控制架构：全局规划器生成参考轨迹并进行路径优化，局部运动学MPC控制器结合传感器反馈实现实时避障与轨迹修正，同时平衡双机械臂的协同作业和工艺约束。系统通过对离散轨迹进行样条插值与连续化处理，使生成的运动轨迹既符合高精度焊接要求，又保证控制平滑性与多臂协作的时空一致性。此外，控制系统充分考虑动态环境因素，包括焊缝初始偏差、工件热变形和传感器噪声，通过实时在线修正和局部重规划策略，实现对复杂空间中焊接任务的稳定控制，为大型钢结构自动化焊接提供完整的软件与控制解决方案。

关键词：多机器人协同焊接；大型钢结构；运动规划；模型预测控制（MPC）

 
正  文
1. 选题的来源、背景和意义
1.1 选题来源和背景
当前，以船舶、桥梁、航空航天为代表的高端装备制造业正面临深刻的智能化转型升级压力。这些领域的核心部件——大型钢结构，其制造质量与效率直接关乎国家重大工程的建设周期与安全性能。然而，该类结构的焊接生产仍高度依赖人工作业，不仅面临效率低下、劳动力成本攀升的困境，更受制于恶劣作业环境对工人健康的损害以及人工技能水平导致的质量波动。推动焊接过程的自动化与智能化，已成为提升我国高端制造业核心竞争力的必然要求与迫切需求。
在此背景下，工业机器人技术凭借其高柔性、可编程的优势，成为实现自动化焊接的理想解决方案[1]。而相较于单机器人，多机器人协同作业系统通过并行工作能极大缩短生产周期，并凭借其内在的冗余性提升了系统可靠性，代表了未来智能化的发展方向[2]。将多机器人系统应用于大型钢结构的焊接，有望突破传统生产模式的瓶颈。
然而，理想的技术路径却面临着严峻的现实挑战。大型钢结构内部筋板密布、空间狭窄，构成了极其复杂的几何约束环境，这使得传统的路径规划算法难以高效地为多个机械臂生成无碰撞的安全路径。更重要的是，多个机器人在共享的封闭空间内作业，极易发生相互干涉甚至死锁，如何实现它们之间的智能协同与任务分配，是一个复杂的系统性难题。此外，焊接作为一项精密工艺，对焊枪姿态、移动速度有着严格要求，而现有的规划方法大多局限于几何避障，缺乏与焊接工艺知识的深度融合，导致其生成的轨迹难以直接用于高质量生产[3]。
1.2 选题的意义
随着新一轮科技革命与产业变革的深入发展，以机器人技术为代表的智能装备已成为推动制造业向数字化、智能化转型升级的核心驱动力，是衡量国家工业基础与科技创新能力的关键标志。在此进程中，多机器人协同作业系统因其高度的柔性、并行性与可重构性，在大型复杂构件制造中展现出巨大潜力，正逐渐成为先进智能制造模式的重要载体[4-6]。
然而，协同机器人系统的规模化应用，其前提是必须解决在共享、动态、非结构化环境下的安全与效率矛盾。特别是在大型钢结构等空间约束极强的场景中，多机器人系统的路径规划已不再是单一的几何避障问题，而是演变为一个涉及动态决策、资源竞争规避与工艺质量保障的复杂系统优化问题[7]。传统以单机为核心的路径规划方法，难以有效应对多机协同下的死锁、振荡与效率低下等挑战，严重制约了该技术在高价值制造场景中的落地应用。
因此，开展面向大型钢结构的多机器人协同路径规划研究，其核心意义在于通过智能算法的突破，打通从“单机自动化”到“群体智能化”的关键技术路径[7]。本研究旨在构建一套能够在复杂空间内实现多机器人高效、无冲突、工艺合规的协同作业的规划体系，不仅能够直接提升大型结构制造的效率与质量，降低对高技能操作者的依赖，更是对实现安全、高效、柔性的人机共融智能工厂的有力支撑。该研究的成功推进，将为解决高端装备制造业的共性痛点提供核心算法保障。
2. 文献综述
2.1 路径规划的国内外现状研究
路径规划算法根据规划算法不同，目前主要分为以下三类：基于图搜索的算法、基于采样的算法、基于数值优化的算法。
2.2.1 基于图搜索的算法
基于图搜索的路径规划算法通常是采用离散化节点和边来表示机器人的工作空间，并通过相应的搜索策略与代价计算函数，在构建好的图模型中寻找一条从起点到目标点的无碰撞路径，从而确定机器人的运动轨迹。在众多路径规划方法中，基于图搜索的算法是理论最成熟，应用也最为广泛的经典方法之一。
如图1所示是由荷兰计算机科学家艾兹格·迪杰斯特拉提出的一种基于图搜索的最短路径算法[8]。其算法核心采用广度优先搜索策略，具有逻辑严谨、保证最优性和编程简单易实现等特点。最终在理论证明和大量应用中验证了其能够百分百找到从起点到终点的最短路径。该算法最终的时间复杂度为O(|V|^2)，其中|V|为图的顶点数量，适用于求解带权有向图或无向图的单源最短路径问题。
 
图1. Dijkstra 算法图示[9]
如图2所示是由斯坦福国际研究院的彼得·哈特等人提出的一种启发式图搜索算法[9]。其算法核心在Dijkstra算法基础上引入启发式函数，具有搜索效率高、方向性强且能保证最优解等特点。通过理论分析与实际应用验证，在合适的启发函数下，其搜索效率远高于传统的Dijkstra算法。该算法的时间复杂度最优情况下为O(|E|+|V||og|V|)，主要适用于静态环境下的全局路径规划问题。
 
图2. A*算法图示[10]
2.2.2 基于采样的算法
RRT（快速随机扩展树）算法在路径规划中收敛速度相对较慢，生成的初始路径通常曲折且非最优，随机性强导致结果不稳定。RRT算法的核心原理通常采用在构型空间中随机采样并扩展树结构的形式[10]。但RRT算法无需对环境进行建模，规划速度快，由于采用了随机采样的方法，其能够有效解决高维空间和复杂约束下的路径规划问题。RRT算法以其原理简单、实现容易、高维空间效率高的显著特点受到广泛关注和研究，常被应用于机械臂规划、无人机导航、自动驾驶等领域。但是，RRT算法受制于其随机性，搜索通常缺乏方向性，因而早期路径质量往往较差，需要大量后期优化，最终导致其在开阔空间中效率不如A*等启发式算法。如图4所示，S. Karaman 等人提出的 RRT*算法[11]，通过引入“重连接”优化步骤，显著提高了RRT算法生成路径的最优性和收敛速度。
 
图4. RRT*重连接[11]
如图5所示，为北京航空航天大学诸武等人提出了一种贝叶斯引导的进化策略和RRT融合算法[12]。该算法通过引入贝叶斯优化框架和自适应进化策略，利用当前和历史信息，从全局视角找到最优分配方案，在保证路径多样性的同时显著提升了探索效率。同时，利用概率路线图对采样点进行动态优化，生成覆盖全面且避障可靠的协同探索路径。
 
图5. 融合算法框架[12]
2.2.3 基于数值优化的算法
人工势场法以概念直观、计算量小、易于实现实时控制等特点，成为机器人局部路径规划中最为经典的方法之一[13-14]。近年来，随着反应式避障需求的增长和嵌入式处理器算力的提升，人工势场法为移动机器人的在线安全避障提供了有效的解决方案。但是，传统人工势场法容易陷入局部最小值且在狭窄通道中易产生振荡。如图6所示，暨南大学的研究团队提出了一种改进的人工势场法[15]。该方法在传统势场函数中引入了动态障碍物预测机制和自适应调节因子。当环境中存在移动障碍物时，算法能够预测其运动轨迹并动态调整斥力场强度，从而有效解决了动态避障问题。同时，通过设计自适应调节因子，使机器人在接近目标时能够平滑过渡到精确位置。仿真结果表明，该改进算法在动态环境中的避障成功率高达95%，平均响应时间仅需30毫秒，显著提升了算法在动态场景中的适应性和实时性。
 
图6. 改进人工势场法的力图[15]
河北省数字医学工程重点实验室提出了一种基于协同势场与运动学约束的双机械臂改进人工势场法[16]。该算法引入了双臂间的协同势场和关节空间运动学约束和动态障碍物预测模型，相较于传统人工势场法，改进后的算法能有效避免双臂干涉及自碰撞，进而提高了双机械臂系统作业的安全性和协调性。同时，利用关节空间轨迹优化方法对路径点进行平滑处理，生成符合机械臂动力学约束的可行轨迹。仿真结果表明，该算法在双机械臂协同避障场景中的路径规划成功率超过96%，双臂运动轨迹平滑无干涉，显著提升了复杂任务下双机械臂系统的智能性和可靠性。
如图8所示，为北京工业大学研究团队提出的一种基于非线性模型预测控制的领导者-跟随者编队控制器[17]。该团队针对多移动机器人编队控制问题，设计了一种将NMPC与QP优化相结合的新型控制架构，能够同时处理队形保持、避障和速度约束。控制器在每个采样周期内构建一个带约束的非线性优化问题，并通过序列二次规划（SQP）方法将其转化为一系列QP子问题在线求解，从而生成最优控制指令。此外，这种控制架构无需复杂的避障逻辑层，结构统一、响应快速。仿真结果表明，该控制器在复杂环境下队形保持误差小于0.15m，最大跟踪误差降低约40%，显著提升了多机器人系统的协同控制性能和鲁棒性。
 
图8. 领导-跟随者编队系统模式[17]
2.2.5 其他路径规划算法
仿生智能算法是一类以生物界现象为灵感，依据生物群体的集体智慧或自然进化规律为原理，通过模拟其行为模式来求解复杂优化问题的算法。仿生智能算法一个显著特点就是无需问题的梯度信息，降低了对问题本身数学性质的要求，并且由于其强大的全局搜索能力和对非线性问题的有效性，非常适合在高维、多峰、离散等传统优化方法难以处理的复杂场景下寻找满意解。如图10所示，台湾鸿光大学基于元启发式优化原理提出一种混合遗传算法-粒子群优化路径规划方法[18]。为提升算法在复杂环境中的搜索效率，该团队采用了遗传算法的交叉变异机制与粒子群优化的社会学习模型相结合的策略，通过将GA的全局探索能力与PSO的局部开发特性相融合，构建混合优化框架。然后使用三次B样条技术对混合GA-PSO 规划器生成的初始可行路径进行平滑处理，以构建接近最佳的无碰撞连续路径。
 
图10. 在双U形环境中提出的路径规划与平滑的仿真结果[18]
如图11所示，为印度尼西亚泗水Sepuluh Nopember技术学院研究团队提出的一种基于蚁群优化算法并结合贪心启发式策略的多机器人导航方法[19]。该算法主要由信息素更新机制、状态转移规则和贪心启发函数组成。当机器人在环境中探索时，蚁群算法通过信息素浓度指导路径选择，任何局部最优解都会通过贪心策略的快速评估进行调整。此外，如果遇到动态障碍物，启发式规则将实时调整路径规划。并且该算法设计的分布式框架可实现多机器人协同导航，仿真结果显示该方法在复杂环境中路径规划成功率可达95.8%，收敛速度提升约30%，有效解决了多机器人系统的协同导航问题。
 
图11. 最优路径图[19]
如图11所示，为巴基斯坦阿托克卡姆拉航空航天校区研究团队提出一种新的框架，该框架涉及确定性协调多机器人探索（CME）和元启发式频率修正鲸鱼优化算法（WOA）技术的集成，以进行模仿鲸鱼捕食行为的搜索探索[20]。利用统计目标函数动态调整频率来调整开发和勘探操作员。所提出的框架涉及利用确定性CME技术确定单个群体成员周围的成本和效用函数值，同时搜索空间探索以利用频率修正的鲸鱼元启发式方法优化和改进整体解决方案。通过在不同复杂环境条件下训练多机器人框架，确定了所提出的变频混合鲸鱼优化算法（FMH-WOA）的有效性。
 
图12. FMH-WOA算法的实现：密集和杂乱的环境[20]
3. 研究内容和创新点
3.1研究内容
（1）基于运动学的预测模型建立与轨迹参数化
本研究的核心是运动学层面的控制，因此将建立适用于MPC的机械臂运动学模型。具体而言，将基于机械臂的D-H参数，推导其微分运动学关系，即雅可比矩阵，构建以关节角速度作为控制输入、末端执行器在笛卡尔空间中的线速度和角速度作为输出的线性化预测模型。该模型描述了控制输入与末端位姿变化之间的映射关系，是MPC进行前向预测的基础。同时，将对上层规划给出的离散参考路径（末端位姿序列）进行样条插值等光滑化处理，并完成以时间为参数的轨迹生成，得到连续且可微的参考轨迹信号，为精确跟踪提供设定值。
（2）融合笛卡尔空间跟踪与关节空间约束的MPC设计
控制器设计是本研究的关键。目标函数将设计为在预测时域内最小化机械臂末端执行器的轨迹跟踪误差。该误差包括位置误差和姿态误差（如用四元数或欧拉角偏差表示），以确保焊接精度。同时，在目标函数中加入对关节角速度变化率的惩罚项，以平滑控制动作，减少机构冲击。在约束处理方面，将系统性地集成多种物理限制：包括关节的角度位置和角速度极限，以防止超程和超速；同时，将多机器人之间的防碰撞约束，通过运动学模型映射到关节空间，或直接在笛卡尔空间中定义为关于末端位姿的非线性约束，并在线性化后嵌入MPC的优化问题中，确保协同作业的安全性。
（3）控制算法的实时实现与协同仿真验证
为解决MPC在线优化问题的实时性挑战，本研究将重点研究高效求解策略。针对所构建的二次规划问题，将采用有效集法或内点法等数值优化算法，并利用其稀疏结构提升计算效率。为验证控制方案，将构建高保真的协同仿真平台：在MATLAB/Simulink中实现所设计的MPC算法，并通过机器人仿真软件（如Gazebo）建立多机械臂及工作场景的物理模型。通过联合仿真，系统测试控制器在复杂空间轨迹下的跟踪精度、在存在初始偏差或路径扰动时的自适应调整能力，以及面对潜在碰撞威胁时的实时避障性能，从而全面评估该运动学MPC控制策略的有效性与鲁棒性。
3.2创新点
（1）提出了一种面向双机械臂协同焊接的运动学 MPC 控制框架，将笛卡尔空间的高精度轨迹跟踪与关节空间的物理约束统一到同一优化结构中。通过基于 D-H 参数建立的运动学模型和雅可比线性化映射，控制器能够在跟踪焊缝轨迹的同时处理关节限位与双臂避障等耦合约束，使双机械臂在复杂钢结构上保持协调一致的运动，提高焊接精度与安全性。
（2）采用轻量化的运动学预测模型替代动力学建模，使非线性避障通过局部线性化转化为可实时求解的约束，从而在保持协同能力的前提下显著降低计算量。该方法兼具实时性与工程可实现性，为双机械臂协同焊接提供了一套高效、可落地的 MPC 控制方案。
4. 研究方法和设计方案
4.1 研究方法
（1）基于实验室现有的机器人操作系统（ROS1）平台，设计并实现面向双机械臂协同焊接的智能控制软件系统。利用C++语言开发轨迹规划与运动学预测模型模块，并结合MPC优化算法实现末端轨迹跟踪与关节约束耦合控制。通过ROS通信机制实现各模块间的数据交互与任务调度，同时整合传感器信息（如焊缝视觉感知、激光测距）构建统一的软件架构，为双机械臂协同焊接提供完整的控制解决方案。
（2）使用Gazebo仿真环境建立龙门架双机械臂及焊接场景的虚拟测试平台。对离散参考焊缝轨迹进行样条插值生成连续可微的参考信号，并在典型大型钢结构焊缝路径上验证MPC控制策略。通过对比传统路径跟踪方法（如关节空间PID控制）与本文提出的笛卡尔空间轨迹-关节约束耦合MPC算法，评估其在轨迹跟踪精度、姿态稳定性、控制平滑性及双臂协作安全性方面的性能提升。
（3）针对焊接过程中可能出现的动态扰动（如焊缝初始偏差、路径扰动、热变形引起的偏移），研究双机械臂协同运动控制算法。通过高精度运动学预测模型与实时MPC优化，实现末端轨迹快速修正和关节速度平滑调整，并利用ROS节点并行化处理控制计算，保证算法在复杂焊接工况下的实时性与鲁棒性。
（4）在实验室龙门架双机械臂焊接平台上进行系统集成与实物验证。通过实际焊接实验测试控制系统在轨迹跟踪精度、焊枪姿态稳定性、双臂协作安全性以及动态工况适应性方面的表现，并结合焊缝成形分析和无损检测结果，验证所提基于运动学MPC的协同控制方法在大型钢结构焊接中的工程适用性与可靠性。
4.2 设计方案
（1）针对双机械臂协同焊接任务，深入分析现有运动学控制与路径规划的局限，提出一种融合笛卡尔空间轨迹跟踪与关节空间约束的运动学MPC控制方案。基于机械臂D-H参数构建末端位姿到关节速度的预测模型，并通过雅可比矩阵进行线性化，实现以关节速度为输入、末端线速度和角速度为输出的预测框架。对上层规划提供的离散焊缝轨迹进行样条插值生成连续可微的参考信号，同时在MPC优化中集成关节限位、速度约束及双臂间碰撞约束，实现轨迹跟踪精度与多机器人协作安全性的统一。
（2）在ROS1/Gazebo仿真环境中建立龙门架双机械臂及焊接场景的虚拟测试平台。设计典型焊接场景，包括大型平面结构焊接和复杂三维曲面焊缝，测试MPC在轨迹跟踪精度、姿态稳定性、关节运动平滑性及双臂协作安全性方面的性能。同时，通过对参考路径扰动或焊缝初始偏差进行动态仿真，评估控制策略的鲁棒性和实时纠偏能力，为优化控制参数提供依据。
（3）将规划与运动学MPC控制系统部署于实验室龙门架双机械臂焊接平台，实现从感知到轨迹执行的闭环控制。感知模块通过激光和视觉传感器实时获取焊缝位置及状态，规划模块生成连续参考轨迹，控制模块利用运动学预测模型和MPC实时计算关节速度输出，实现末端轨迹快速修正与协同避障。通过焊缝成形分析与无损检测对比仿真结果，验证系统在焊接精度、双臂协作、安全性及动态工况适应性方面的工程可行性与稳定性。
5. 研究重点、难点及解决方案
5.1 研究重点、难点
（1）焊接工艺约束与轨迹跟踪控制的深度耦合难题
本研究的核心在于将焊接工艺约束与机械臂轨迹跟踪控制有机结合，实现高精度、多机器人协同焊接。焊接过程中对末端姿态、速度稳定性和热输入有严格要求，而运动学MPC控制需要处理关节限位、速度约束及双臂间的协同避障。如何将离散的工艺要求量化为连续可用于MPC优化的约束，并在轨迹预测和控制过程中兼顾多目标优化，是关键难点。具体表现为：工艺参数（焊枪姿态、速度波动、热输入）与末端位姿跟踪之间存在相互制约，需设计既能满足焊接精度，又不导致MPC求解复杂度过高的约束模型；同时需要合理权衡轨迹平滑性、关节运动平滑性和工艺约束稳定性，保证多目标协同优化的有效性。
（2）多机器人协同控制的实时性与动态适应性挑战
在大型钢结构焊接过程中，双机械臂系统需在复杂空间和动态环境下保持协同作业。热变形、工件定位误差及传感器噪声等动态扰动会导致预先规划的轨迹偏离，影响焊接质量。研究的难点在于：如何在保证末端轨迹精度和姿态稳定性的前提下，实现多机器人间的时空同步与碰撞避障；如何在有限计算资源下实时求解运动学MPC优化问题，包括路径重规划和关节速度修正，同时保证解的可行性和控制平滑性。这要求设计高效的优化算法、运动学预测模型和在线反馈机制，实现系统在复杂焊接工况下的稳定、鲁棒协作。
5.2 解决方案
（1）焊接工艺约束与轨迹跟踪耦合的解决方案
针对工艺约束与MPC轨迹控制之间的耦合难题，本研究通过建立基于D-H参数的运动学预测模型，将末端位姿变化与关节速度映射关系明确化。利用雅可比线性化方法，将焊接工艺约束（如焊枪姿态角、速度稳定性、热输入）转化为MPC优化问题中的可线性化约束，实现工艺约束与轨迹跟踪的统一优化。对离散参考焊缝轨迹进行样条插值生成连续可微的信号，并在MPC目标函数中同时考虑末端轨迹误差与关节速度平滑性，通过加权多目标优化实现焊接精度与运动平滑性的平衡，从而有效解决工艺与轨迹约束的冲突问题。
（2）多机器人协同控制实时性与动态适应性的解决方案
针对大型钢结构焊接中存在的动态扰动与协同同步难题，本研究设计了基于ROS1的多机器人协同控制架构，通过激光和视觉传感器实时获取焊缝及环境信息，实现轨迹偏差的在线感知。结合轻量化运动学预测模型和高效MPC优化求解器，控制器可在有限计算资源下实时计算关节速度输出，并通过局部轨迹修正和碰撞约束线性化，实现双机械臂的时空同步与安全协作。通过仿真验证与参数优化，确保系统在热变形、初始偏差和路径扰动等动态环境下，仍能保持高精度轨迹跟踪、姿态稳定性和协同作业的鲁棒性。
Abstract Large steel structures (such as bridge main bodies and ship sections) are crucial components of national key infrastructure, and their welding quality and efficiency directly affect the progress and safety of major engineering projects. Traditional manual welding is not only labor-intensive and operates in harsh environments, but also suffers from low efficiency and unstable weld quality. Therefore, promoting the automation and intelligentization of the welding process has become an urgent need for the manufacturing industry. Against this backdrop, multi-robot collaborative welding technology, with its high parallelism, high flexibility, and high operational efficiency, has shown broad application prospects in the welding of large structural components. However, applying multi-robot systems to the welding of large steel structures with complex structures and limited space still faces a series of key technical bottlenecks: how to plan feasible paths for multiple robotic arms in a complex three-dimensional space that meet welding process constraints and are completely collision-free; and how to ensure the robustness and real-time collaborative capability of the multi-robot system in dealing with dynamic disturbances (such as workpiece thermal deformation and pose errors) during long-term welding operations.

To address these challenges, this paper proposes a dual-robotic arm collaborative welding control method for large steel structures. First, a kinematic prediction model for the robotic arm is established based on D-H parameters. The Jacobian matrix is ​​used to map the end-effector trajectory to joint velocities, integrating welding process constraints (including welding torch posture, welding speed stability, and welding sequence requirements) into the MPC optimization framework to achieve unified optimization of end-effector trajectory tracking and joint space constraints. Second, a hierarchical planning and control architecture is designed for complex welding environments: a global planner generates a reference trajectory and performs path optimization, while a local kinematic MPC controller, combined with sensor feedback, achieves real-time obstacle avoidance and trajectory correction, balancing the collaborative operation of the two robotic arms and process constraints. The system uses spline interpolation and continuous processing on discrete trajectories to ensure that the generated motion trajectory meets high-precision welding requirements while guaranteeing control smoothness and spatiotemporal consistency of multi-arm collaboration. Furthermore, the control system fully considers dynamic environmental factors, including initial weld deviation, workpiece thermal deformation, and sensor noise. Through real-time online correction and local replanning strategies, stable control of welding tasks in complex spaces is achieved, providing a complete software and control solution for automated welding of large steel structures.

Keywords: multi-robot collaborative welding; large steel structure; motion planning; model predictive control (MPC)

Main Text
1. Source, Background and Significance of the Topic
1.1 Source and Background of the Topic
Currently, the high-end equipment manufacturing industry, represented by shipbuilding, bridges and aerospace, is facing profound pressure for intelligent transformation and upgrading. The core component of these fields—large steel structures—has manufacturing quality and efficiency that directly affect the construction cycle and safety performance of major national projects. However, the welding production of such structures still relies heavily on manual labor, which not only faces the dilemma of low efficiency and rising labor costs, but is also constrained by the damage to workers' health caused by harsh working environments and the quality fluctuations caused by the level of human skills. Promoting the automation and intelligence of the welding process has become an inevitable requirement and urgent need to enhance the core competitiveness of my country's high-end manufacturing industry.

In this context, industrial robot technology, with its advantages of high flexibility and programmability, has become an ideal solution for realizing automated welding[1]. Compared with single robots, multi-robot collaborative operation systems can greatly shorten the production cycle through parallel work, and improve system reliability with their inherent redundancy, representing the future direction of intelligent development[2]. Applying multi-robot systems to the welding of large steel structures is expected to break through the bottleneck of traditional production modes. However, the ideal technical path faces severe practical challenges. The dense ribs and narrow spaces inside large steel structures constitute an extremely complex geometric constraint environment, which makes it difficult for traditional path planning algorithms to efficiently generate collision-free safe paths for multiple robotic arms. More importantly, multiple robots working in a shared enclosed space are prone to mutual interference or even deadlock. How to achieve intelligent collaboration and task allocation among them is a complex systemic problem. In addition, welding, as a precision process, has strict requirements on the posture and movement speed of the welding torch, while existing planning methods are mostly limited to geometric obstacle avoidance and lack deep integration with welding process knowledge, making it difficult to directly use the generated trajectories for high-quality production [3]. 1.2 Significance of the Topic With the in-depth development of the new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation, intelligent equipment represented by robot technology has become the core driving force for promoting the digital and intelligent transformation and upgrading of the manufacturing industry, and is a key indicator for measuring a country's industrial foundation and technological innovation capabilities. In this process, multi-robot collaborative operation systems, due to their high flexibility, parallelism, and reconfigurability, have shown great potential in the manufacturing of large and complex components and are gradually becoming an important carrier of advanced intelligent manufacturing models [4-6].

However, the large-scale application of collaborative robot systems requires solving the contradiction between safety and efficiency in shared, dynamic, and unstructured environments. Especially in scenarios with extremely strong spatial constraints, such as large steel structures, path planning for multi-robot systems is no longer a simple geometric obstacle avoidance problem, but has evolved into a complex system optimization problem involving dynamic decision-making, resource competition avoidance, and process quality assurance [7]. Traditional path planning methods based on single robots are difficult to effectively address challenges such as deadlock, oscillation, and low efficiency under multi-robot collaboration, which seriously restricts the application of this technology in high-value manufacturing scenarios.

Therefore, the core significance of conducting research on multi-robot collaborative path planning for large steel structures lies in breaking through the key technical path from "single-robot automation" to "collective intelligence" through breakthroughs in intelligent algorithms [7]. This research aims to construct a planning system capable of enabling efficient, conflict-free, and compliant collaborative operations of multiple robots in complex spaces. This system not only directly improves the efficiency and quality of large-structure manufacturing and reduces reliance on highly skilled operators, but also provides strong support for achieving safe, efficient, and flexible human-robot integrated intelligent factories. Successful implementation of this research will provide core algorithmic guarantees for solving common pain points in the high-end equipment manufacturing industry.

2. Literature Review

2.1 Current Status of Path Planning Research at Home and Abroad
Path planning algorithms are currently mainly divided into three categories based on different planning algorithms: graph search-based algorithms, sampling-based algorithms, and numerical optimization-based algorithms.

2.2.1 Graph Search-Based Algorithms
Graph search-based path planning algorithms typically use discretized nodes and edges to represent the robot's workspace. Through corresponding search strategies and cost calculation functions, they find a collision-free path from the starting point to the target point in the constructed graph model, thereby determining the robot's trajectory. Among numerous path planning methods, graph search-based algorithms are one of the most theoretically mature and widely used classic methods.

Figure 1 shows a graph search-based shortest path algorithm proposed by Dutch computer scientist Ezig Dijkstra [8]. Its core algorithm employs a breadth-first search strategy, featuring rigorous logic, guaranteed optimality, and simple programming implementation. Theoretical proofs and numerous applications have verified that it can find the shortest path from the starting point to the destination with 100% accuracy. The final time complexity of this algorithm is O(|V|^2), where |V| is the number of vertices in the graph, suitable for solving single-source shortest path problems in weighted directed or undirected graphs.

Figure 1. Illustration of Dijkstra's algorithm [9]
Figure 2 shows a heuristic graph search algorithm proposed by Peter Hart et al. of Stanford Research Institute [9]. Its core algorithm introduces a heuristic function based on Dijkstra's algorithm, featuring high search efficiency, strong directionality, and guaranteed optimal solution. Through theoretical analysis and practical application verification, under a suitable heuristic function, its search efficiency is far higher than the traditional Dijkstra algorithm. The optimal time complexity of this algorithm is O(|E|+|V||og|V|), which is mainly applicable to global path planning problems in static environments.

Figure 2. Illustration of A* algorithm [10]

2.2.2 Sampling-based algorithm

The RRT (Rapid Random Tree Expansion) algorithm has a relatively slow convergence speed in path planning. The generated initial path is usually tortuous and non-optimal, and the strong randomness leads to unstable results. The core principle of the RRT algorithm usually adopts the form of random sampling in the configuration space and expanding the tree structure [10]. However, the RRT algorithm does not require environmental modeling and has a fast planning speed. Due to the use of random sampling, it can effectively solve path planning problems in high-dimensional space and under complex constraints. The RRT algorithm has received widespread attention and research due to its simple principle, easy implementation, and high efficiency in high-dimensional space. It is often applied in fields such as robotic arm planning, UAV navigation, and autonomous driving. However, the RRT algorithm is constrained by its randomness, and the search usually lacks directionality. Therefore, the quality of the early path is often poor, requiring a lot of later optimization, which ultimately leads to its lower efficiency than heuristic algorithms such as A* in open space. As shown in Figure 4, the RRT* algorithm proposed by S. Karaman et al. [11] significantly improves the optimality and convergence speed of the path generated by the RRT algorithm by introducing a "reconnection" optimization step.

Figure 4. RRT* reconnection [11]

As shown in Figure 5, a Bayesian-guided evolutionary strategy and RRT fusion algorithm [12] were proposed by Zhu Wu et al. of Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics. This algorithm introduces a Bayesian optimization framework and an adaptive evolutionary strategy, utilizes current and historical information, finds the optimal allocation scheme from a global perspective, and significantly improves exploration efficiency while ensuring path diversity. At the same time, it uses a probability route map to dynamically optimize the sampling points and generate a comprehensive and reliable collaborative exploration path.

Figure 5. Fusion algorithm framework [12]

2.2.3 Numerical optimization-based algorithm
The artificial potential field method has become one of the most classic methods in robot local path planning due to its intuitive concept, small computational load, and ease of real-time control [13-14]. In recent years, with the growth of reactive obstacle avoidance requirements and the improvement of embedded processor computing power, the artificial potential field method has provided an effective solution for online safe obstacle avoidance of mobile robots. However, the traditional artificial potential field method is prone to getting trapped in local minima and oscillations in narrow channels. As shown in Figure 6, the research team of Jinan University proposed an improved artificial potential field method [15]. This method introduces a dynamic obstacle prediction mechanism and an adaptive adjustment factor into the traditional potential field function. When there are moving obstacles in the environment, the algorithm can predict their trajectory and dynamically adjust the repulsive field strength, thus effectively solving the dynamic obstacle avoidance problem. At the same time, by designing an adaptive adjustment factor, the robot can smoothly transition to the precise position when approaching the target. Simulation results show that the improved algorithm has an obstacle avoidance success rate of up to 95% in dynamic environments, and the average response time is only 30 milliseconds, which significantly improves the adaptability and real-time performance of the algorithm in dynamic scenes.

Figure 6. Force diagram of the improved artificial potential field method [15] The Key Laboratory of Digital Medicine Engineering of Hebei Province proposed an improved artificial potential field method for dual robotic arms based on cooperative potential field and kinematic constraints [16]. The algorithm introduces a cooperative potential field between the two arms, joint space kinematic constraints, and a dynamic obstacle prediction model. Compared with the traditional artificial potential field method, the improved algorithm can effectively avoid interference and self-collision between the two arms, thereby improving the safety and coordination of the dual-arm system operation. At the same time, the path points are smoothed by using the joint space trajectory optimization method to generate feasible trajectories that conform to the dynamic constraints of the robotic arms. Simulation results show that the algorithm has a path planning success rate of over 96% in the dual-arm cooperative obstacle avoidance scenario, and the motion trajectory of the two arms is smooth and interference-free, which significantly improves the intelligence and reliability of the dual-arm system under complex tasks. As shown in Figure 8, a leader-follower formation controller based on nonlinear model predictive control proposed by the research team of Beijing University of Technology [17]. The team designed a new control architecture that combines NMPC and QP optimization for the formation control problem of multi-mobile robots, which can simultaneously handle formation maintenance, obstacle avoidance, and velocity constraints. The controller constructs a constrained nonlinear optimization problem in each sampling period and transforms it into a series of QP subproblems to be solved online through the sequential quadratic programming (SQP) method, thereby generating the optimal control command. In addition, this control architecture does not require a complex obstacle avoidance logic layer, and has a unified structure and fast response. Simulation results show that the formation holding error of the controller in complex environments is less than 0.15m, and the maximum tracking error is reduced by about 40%, which significantly improves the cooperative control performance and robustness of the multi-robot system.

Figure 8. Leader-follower formation system mode[17]

2.2.5 Other path planning algorithms

Bionic intelligent algorithms are a class of algorithms inspired by biological phenomena, based on the collective wisdom of biological groups or the laws of natural evolution, and solve complex optimization problems by simulating their behavior patterns. A significant feature of bionic intelligent algorithms is that they do not require gradient information of the problem, which reduces the requirements on the mathematical properties of the problem itself. Furthermore, due to their powerful global search capability and effectiveness in nonlinear problems, they are very suitable for finding satisfactory solutions in complex scenarios that are difficult to handle by traditional optimization methods, such as high-dimensional, multi-peak, and discrete problems. As shown in Figure 10, Hungkuang University in Taiwan proposed a hybrid genetic algorithm-particle swarm optimization path planning method based on the metaheuristic optimization principle[18]. To improve the search efficiency of the algorithm in complex environments, the team adopted a strategy that combines the crossover and mutation mechanism of the genetic algorithm with the social learning model of particle swarm optimization. By integrating the global exploration capability of GA with the local development characteristics of PSO, a hybrid optimization framework was constructed. Then, cubic B-spline technology was used to smooth the initial feasible path generated by the hybrid GA-PSO planner to construct a near-optimal collision-free continuous path.

Figure 10. Simulation results of path planning and smoothing proposed in a double U-shaped environment [18]

Figure 11 shows a multi-robot navigation method based on ant colony optimization algorithm combined with a greedy heuristic strategy proposed by the research team of Sepuluh Nopember Institute of Technology in Surabaya, Indonesia [19]. The algorithm mainly consists of a pheromone update mechanism, a state transition rule, and a greedy heuristic function. When the robot explores the environment, the ant colony algorithm guides the path selection through pheromone concentration, and any local optimal solution will be adjusted through the rapid evaluation of the greedy strategy. In addition, if dynamic obstacles are encountered, the heuristic rule will adjust the path planning in real time. Furthermore, the distributed framework designed by the algorithm can realize multi-robot cooperative navigation. Simulation results show that the path planning success rate of this method in complex environments can reach 95.8%, and the convergence speed is improved by about 30%, effectively solving the cooperative navigation problem of multi-robot systems.

Figure 11. Optimal path diagram [19] As shown in Figure 11, a new framework is proposed by the research team of the Atok Kamra Aerospace Campus in Pakistan. This framework involves the integration of deterministic coordinated multi-robot exploration (CME) and metaheuristic frequency-corrected whale optimization algorithm (WOA) techniques to conduct search exploration that mimics whale predation behavior [20]. The frequency is dynamically adjusted using a statistical objective function to adjust the development and exploration operators. The proposed framework involves the use of deterministic CME techniques
First Citizen:
Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.

All:
Speak, speak.

First Citizen:
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?

All:
Resolved. resolved.

First Citizen:
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.

All:
We know't, we know't.

First Citizen:
Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.
Is't a verdict?

All:
No more talking on't; let it be done: away, away!

Second Citizen:
One word, good citizens.

First Citizen:
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they
would yield us but the superfluity, while it were
wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely;
but they think we are too dear: the leanness that
afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
inventory to particularise their abundance; our
sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge this with
our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I
speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.

Second Citizen:
Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius?

All:
Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.

Second Citizen:
Consider you what services he has done for his country?

First Citizen:
Very well; and could be content to give him good
report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.

Second Citizen:
Nay, but speak not maliciously.

First Citizen:
I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did
it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be
content to say it was for his country he did it to
please his mother and to be partly proud; which he
is, even till the altitude of his virtue.

Second Citizen:
What he cannot help in his nature, you account a
vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous.

First Citizen:
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
What shouts are these? The other side o' the city
is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!

All:
Come, come.

First Citizen:
Soft! who comes here?

Second Citizen:
Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always loved
the people.

First Citizen:
He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!

MENENIUS:
What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you
With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.

First Citizen:
Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do,
which now we'll show 'em in deeds. They say poor
suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we
have strong arms too.

MENENIUS:
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
Will you undo yourselves?

First Citizen:
We cannot, sir, we are undone already.

MENENIUS:
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.

First Citizen:
Care for us! True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us
yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses
crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to
support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act
established against the rich, and provide more
piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain
the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and
there's all the love they bear us.

MENENIUS:
Either you must
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious,
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it;
But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale 't a little more.

First Citizen:
Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to
fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please
you, deliver.

MENENIUS:
There was a time when all the body's members
Rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answer'd--

First Citizen:
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?

MENENIUS:
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus--
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak--it tauntingly replied
To the discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.

First Citizen:
Your belly's answer? What!
The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they--

MENENIUS:
What then?
'Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?

First Citizen:
Should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd,
Who is the sink o' the body,--

MENENIUS:
Well, what then?

First Citizen:
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?

MENENIUS:
I will tell you
If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.

First Citizen:
Ye're long about it.

MENENIUS:
Note me this, good friend;
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd:
'True is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he,
'That I receive the general food at first,
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the store-house and the shop
Of the whole body: but, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood,
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live: and though that all at once,
You, my good friends,'--this says the belly, mark me,--

First Citizen:
Ay, sir; well, well.

MENENIUS:
'Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran.' What say you to't?

First Citizen:
It was an answer: how apply you this?

MENENIUS:
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members; for examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o' the common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?

First Citizen:
I the great toe! why the great toe?

MENENIUS:
For that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost:
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs:
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.
Hail, noble Marcius!

MARCIUS:
Thanks. What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?

First Citizen:
We have ever your good word.

MARCIUS:
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you,
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offence subdues him
And curse that justice did it.
Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
A sick man's appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favours swims with fins of lead
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye?
With every minute you do change a mind,
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another? What's their seeking?

MENENIUS:
For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say,
The city is well stored.

MARCIUS:
Hang 'em! They say!
They'll sit by the fire, and presume to know
What's done i' the Capitol; who's like to rise,
Who thrives and who declines; side factions
and give out
Conjectural marriages; making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's
grain enough!
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth,
And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry
With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
As I could pick my lance.

MENENIUS:
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you,
What says the other troop?

MARCIUS:
They are dissolved: hang 'em!
They said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs,
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds
They vented their complainings; which being answer'd,
And a petition granted them, a strange one--
To break the heart of generosity,
And make bold power look pale--they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon,
Shouting their emulation.

MENENIUS:
What is granted them?

MARCIUS:
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice: one's Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not--'Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroof'd the city,
Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection's arguing.

MENENIUS:
This is strange.

MARCIUS:
Go, get you home, you fragments!

Messenger:
Where's Caius Marcius?

MARCIUS:
Here: what's the matter?

Messenger:
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.

MARCIUS:
I am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to vent
Our musty superfluity. See, our best elders.

First Senator:
Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us;
The Volsces are in arms.

MARCIUS:
They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.

COMINIUS:
You have fought together.

MARCIUS:
Were half to half the world by the ears and he.
Upon my party, I'ld revolt to make
Only my wars with him: he is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.

First Senator:
Then, worthy Marcius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

COMINIUS:
It is your former promise.

MARCIUS:
Sir, it is;
And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff? stand'st out?

TITUS:
No, Caius Marcius;
I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other,
Ere stay behind this business.

MENENIUS:
O, true-bred!

First Senator:
Your company to the Capitol; where, I know,
Our greatest friends attend us.

TITUS:

COMINIUS:
Noble Marcius!

First Senator:

MARCIUS:
Nay, let them follow:
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners,
Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.

SICINIUS:
Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?

BRUTUS:
He has no equal.

SICINIUS:
When we were chosen tribunes for the people,--

BRUTUS:
Mark'd you his lip and eyes?

SICINIUS:
Nay. but his taunts.

BRUTUS:
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.

SICINIUS:
Be-mock the modest moon.

BRUTUS:
The present wars devour him: he is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.

SICINIUS:
Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.

BRUTUS:
Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he's well graced, can not
Better be held nor more attain'd than by
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Shall be the general's fault, though he perform
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Marcius 'O if he
Had borne the business!'

SICINIUS:
Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.

BRUTUS:
Come:
Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius.
Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults
To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed
In aught he merit not.

SICINIUS:
Let's hence, and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.

BRUTUS:
Lets along.

First Senator:
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.

AUFIDIUS:
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought on in this state,
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think
I have the letter here; yes, here it is.
'They have press'd a power, but it is not known
Whether for east or west: the dearth is great;
The people mutinous; and it is rumour'd,
Cominius, Marcius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you:
Consider of it.'

First Senator:
Our army's in the field
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.

AUFIDIUS:
Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretences veil'd till when
They needs must show themselves; which
in the hatching,
It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery.
We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.

Second Senator:
Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission; hie you to your bands:
Let us alone to guard Corioli:
If they set down before 's, for the remove
Bring your army; but, I think, you'll find
They've not prepared for us.

AUFIDIUS:
O, doubt not that;
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your honours.
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.

All:
The gods assist you!

AUFIDIUS:
And keep your honours safe!

First Senator:
Farewell.

Second Senator:
Farewell.

All:
Farewell.

VOLUMNIA:
I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a
more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I
should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he
won honour than in the embracements of his bed where
he would show most love. When yet he was but
tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when
youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when
for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not
sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering
how honour would become such a person. that it was
no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if
renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek
danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel
war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows
bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not
more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child
than now in first seeing he had proved himself a
man.

VIRGILIA:
But had he died in the business, madam; how then?

VOLUMNIA:
Then his good report should have been my son; I
therein would have found issue. Hear me profess
sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love
alike and none less dear than thine and my good
Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their
country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.

Gentlewoman:
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.

VIRGILIA:
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.

VOLUMNIA:
Indeed, you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair,
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him:
Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus:
'Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome:' his bloody brow
With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes,
Like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow
Or all or lose his hire.

VIRGILIA:
His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!

VOLUMNIA:
Away, you fool! it more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria,
We are fit to bid her welcome.

VIRGILIA:
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!

VOLUMNIA:
He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.

VALERIA:
My ladies both, good day to you.

VOLUMNIA:
Sweet madam.

VIRGILIA:
I am glad to see your ladyship.

VALERIA:
How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good
faith. How does your little son?

VIRGILIA:
I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.

VOLUMNIA:
He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than
look upon his school-master.

VALERIA:
O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a
very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o'
Wednesday half an hour together: has such a
confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go
again; and after it again; and over and over he
comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his
fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his
teeth and tear it; O, I warrant it, how he mammocked
it!

VOLUMNIA:
One on 's father's moods.

VALERIA:
Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.

VIRGILIA:
A crack, madam.

VALERIA:
Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.

VIRGILIA:
No, good madam; I will not out of doors.

VALERIA:
Not out of doors!

VOLUMNIA:
She shall, she shall.

VIRGILIA:
Indeed, no, by your patience; I'll not over the
threshold till my lord return from the wars.

VALERIA:
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come,
you must go visit the good lady that lies in.

VIRGILIA:
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with
my prayers; but I cannot go thither.

VOLUMNIA:
Why, I pray you?

VIRGILIA:
'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.

VALERIA:
You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all
the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill
Ithaca full of moths. Come; I would your cambric
were sensible as your finger, that you might leave
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.

VIRGILIA:
No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.

VALERIA:
In truth, la, go with me; and I'll tell you
excellent news of your husband.

VIRGILIA:
O, good madam, there can be none yet.

VALERIA:
Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from
him last night.

VIRGILIA:
Indeed, madam?

VALERIA:
In earnest, it's true; I heard a senator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against
whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of
our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set
down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt
prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true,
on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.

VIRGILIA:
Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every
thing hereafter.

VOLUMNIA:
Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but
disease our better mirth.

VALERIA:
In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then.
Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy
solemness out o' door. and go along with us.

VIRGILIA:
No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish
you much mirth.

VALERIA:
Well, then, farewell.

MARCIUS:
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.

LARTIUS:
My horse to yours, no.

MARCIUS:
'Tis done.

LARTIUS:
Agreed.

MARCIUS:
Say, has our general met the enemy?

Messenger:
They lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.

LARTIUS:
So, the good horse is mine.

MARCIUS:
I'll buy him of you.

LARTIUS:
No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will
For half a hundred years. Summon the town.

MARCIUS:
How far off lie these armies?

Messenger:
Within this mile and half.

MARCIUS:
Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence,
To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?

First Senator:
No, nor a man that fears you less than he,
That's lesser than a little.
Hark! our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls,
Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes;
They'll open of themselves.
Hark you. far off!
There is Aufidius; list, what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.

MARCIUS:
O, they are at it!

LARTIUS:
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!

MARCIUS:
They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields. Advance,
brave Titus:
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows:
He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.

MARCIUS:
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! you herd of--Boils and plagues
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd
Further than seen and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind; backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
And make my wars on you: look to't: come on;
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches followed.
So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds:
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.

First Soldier:
Fool-hardiness; not I.

Second Soldier:
Nor I.

First Soldier:
See, they have shut him in.

All:
To the pot, I warrant him.

LARTIUS:
What is become of Marcius?

All:
Slain, sir, doubtless.

First Soldier:
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters; who, upon the sudden,
Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone,
To answer all the city.

LARTIUS:
O noble fellow!
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius:
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes; but, with thy grim looks and
The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds,
Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.

First Soldier:
Look, sir.

LARTIUS:
O,'tis Marcius!
Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.

First Roman:
This will I carry to Rome.

Second Roman:
And I this.

Third Roman:
A murrain on't! I took this for silver.

MARCIUS:
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them!
And hark, what noise the general makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city;
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.

LARTIUS:
Worthy sir, thou bleed'st;
Thy exercise hath been too violent for
A second course of fight.

MARCIUS:
Sir, praise me not;
My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well:
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus
I will appear, and fight.

LARTIUS:
Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!

MARCIUS:
Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.

LARTIUS:
Thou worthiest Marcius!
Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place;
Call thither all the officers o' the town,
Where they shall know our mind: away!

COMINIUS:
Breathe you, my friends: well fought;
we are come off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods!
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling
fronts encountering,
May give you thankful sacrifice.
Thy news?

Messenger:
The citizens of Corioli have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle:
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.

COMINIUS:
Though thou speak'st truth,
Methinks thou speak'st not well.
How long is't since?

Messenger:
Above an hour, my lord.

COMINIUS:
'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums:
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,
And bring thy news so late?

Messenger:
Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about, else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.

COMINIUS:
Who's yonder,
That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods
He has the stamp of Marcius; and I have
Before-time seen him thus.

MARCIUS:

COMINIUS:
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour
More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue
From every meaner man.

MARCIUS:
Come I too late?

COMINIUS:
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.

MARCIUS:
O, let me clip ye
In arms as sound as when I woo'd, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done,
And tapers burn'd to bedward!

COMINIUS:
Flower of warriors,
How is it with Titus Lartius?

MARCIUS:
As with a man busied about decrees:
Condemning some to death, and some to exile;
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other;
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.

COMINIUS:
Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? call him hither.

MARCIUS:
Let him alone;
He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen,
The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!--
The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.

COMINIUS:
But how prevail'd you?

MARCIUS:
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?

COMINIUS:
Marcius,
We have at disadvantage fought and did
Retire to win our purpose.

MARCIUS:
How lies their battle? know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?

COMINIUS:
As I guess, Marcius,
Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.

MARCIUS:
I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By the blood we have shed together, by the vows
We have made to endure friends, that you directly
Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates;
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.

COMINIUS:
Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking: take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.

MARCIUS:
Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here--
As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting
Wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life
And that his country's dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus, to express his disposition,
And follow Marcius.
O, me alone! make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? none of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select
from all: the rest
Shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march;
And four shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.

COMINIUS:
March on, my fellows:
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.

LARTIUS:
So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties,
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve
For a short holding: if we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.

Lieutenant:
Fear not our care, sir.

LARTIUS:
Hence, and shut your gates upon's.
Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us.

MARCIUS:
I'll fight with none but thee; for I do hate thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.

AUFIDIUS:
We hate alike:
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.

MARCIUS:
Let the first budger die the other's slave,
And the gods doom him after!

AUFIDIUS:
If I fly, Marcius,
Holloa me like a hare.

MARCIUS:
Within these three hours, Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
And made what work I pleased: 'tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me mask'd; for thy revenge
Wrench up thy power to the highest.

AUFIDIUS:
Wert thou the Hector
That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.
Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned seconds.

COMINIUS:
If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
Thou'ldst not believe thy deeds: but I'll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I' the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted,
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the
dull tribunes,
That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours,
Shall say against their hearts 'We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier.'
Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.

LARTIUS:
O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison:
Hadst thou beheld--

MARCIUS:
Pray now, no more: my mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done; that's what I can; induced
As you have been; that's for my country:
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta'en mine act.

COMINIUS:
You shall not be
The grave of your deserving; Rome must know
The value of her own: 'twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings; and to silence that,
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd,
Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done--before our army hear me.

MARCIUS:
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remember'd.

COMINIUS:
Should they not,
Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude,
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses,
Whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth,
Before the common distribution, at
Your only choice.

MARCIUS:
I thank you, general;
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it;
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.

MARCIUS:
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall
I' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing!
When steel grows soft as the parasite's silk,
Let him be made a coverture for the wars!
No more, I say! For that I have not wash'd
My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch.--
Which, without note, here's many else have done,--
You shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical;
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.

COMINIUS:
Too modest are you;
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly: by your patience,
If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known,
As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius
Wears this war's garland: in token of the which,
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging; and from this time,
For what he did before Corioli, call him,
With all the applause and clamour of the host,
CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear
The addition nobly ever!

All:
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS:
I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed, and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To the fairness of my power.

COMINIUS:
So, to our tent;
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate,
For their own good and ours.

LARTIUS:
I shall, my lord.

CORIOLANUS:
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.

COMINIUS:
Take't; 'tis yours. What is't?

CORIOLANUS:
I sometime lay here in Corioli
At a poor man's house; he used me kindly:
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was within my view,
And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: I request you
To give my poor host freedom.

COMINIUS:
O, well begg'd!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.

LARTIUS:
Marcius, his name?

CORIOLANUS:
By Jupiter! forgot.
I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?

COMINIUS:
Go we to our tent:
The blood upon your visage dries; 'tis time
It should be look'd to: come.

AUFIDIUS:
The town is ta'en!

First Soldier:
'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.

AUFIDIUS:
Condition!
I would I were a Roman; for I cannot,
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition!
What good condition can a treaty find
I' the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius,
I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me,
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By the elements,
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine, or I am his: mine emulation
Hath not that honour in't it had; for where
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.

First Soldier:
He's the devil.

AUFIDIUS:
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd
With only suffering stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst
My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city;
Learn how 'tis held; and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.

First Soldier:
Will not you go?

AUFIDIUS:
I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you--
'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.

First Soldier:
I shall, sir.

MENENIUS:
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.

BRUTUS:
Good or bad?

MENENIUS:
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they
love not Marcius.

SICINIUS:
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.

MENENIUS:
Pray you, who does the wolf love?

SICINIUS:
The lamb.

MENENIUS:
Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the
noble Marcius.

BRUTUS:
He's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.

MENENIUS:
He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two
are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.

Both:
Well, sir.

MENENIUS:
In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two
have not in abundance?

BRUTUS:
He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.

SICINIUS:
Especially in pride.

BRUTUS:
And topping all others in boasting.

MENENIUS:
This is strange now: do you two know how you are
censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the
right-hand file? do you?

Both:
Why, how are we censured?

MENENIUS:
Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry?

Both:
Well, well, sir, well.

MENENIUS:
Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little thief of
occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience:
give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at
your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a
pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for
being proud?

BRUTUS:
We do it not alone, sir.

MENENIUS:
I know you can do very little alone; for your helps
are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous
single: your abilities are too infant-like for
doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you
could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks,
and make but an interior survey of your good selves!
O that you could!

BRUTUS:
What then, sir?

MENENIUS:
Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,
proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as
any in Rome.

SICINIUS:
Menenius, you are known well enough too.

MENENIUS:
I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that
loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying
Tiber in't; said to be something imperfect in
favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like
upon too trivial motion; one that converses more
with the buttock of the night than with the forehead
of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my
malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as
you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink
you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a
crooked face at it. I can't say your worships have
delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in
compound with the major part of your syllables: and
though I must be content to bear with those that say
you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that
tell you you have good faces. If you see this in
the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known
well enough too? what barm can your bisson
conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be
known well enough too?

BRUTUS:
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.

MENENIUS:
You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You
are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you
wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a
cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller;
and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a
second day of audience. When you are hearing a
matter between party and party, if you chance to be
pinched with the colic, you make faces like
mummers; set up the bloody flag against all
patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot,
dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled
by your hearing: all the peace you make in their
cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are
a pair of strange ones.

BRUTUS:
Come, come, you are well understood to be a
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
bencher in the Capitol.

MENENIUS:
Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall
encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When
you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the
wagging of your beards; and your beards deserve not
so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's
cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack-
saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud;
who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors
since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the
best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to
your worships: more of your conversation would
infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly
plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.
How now, my as fair as noble ladies,--and the moon,
were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow
your eyes so fast?

VOLUMNIA:
Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for
the love of Juno, let's go.

MENENIUS:
Ha! Marcius coming home!

VOLUMNIA:
Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous
approbation.

MENENIUS:
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!
Marcius coming home!

VOLUMNIA:
Nay,'tis true.

VOLUMNIA:
Look, here's a letter from him: the state hath
another, his wife another; and, I think, there's one
at home for you.

MENENIUS:
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for
me!

VIRGILIA:
Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw't.

MENENIUS:
A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven
years' health; in which time I will make a lip at
the physician: the most sovereign prescription in
Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative,
of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he
not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.

VIRGILIA:
O, no, no, no.

VOLUMNIA:
O, he is wounded; I thank the gods for't.

MENENIUS:
So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a'
victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.

VOLUMNIA:
On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home
with the oaken garland.

MENENIUS:
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?

VOLUMNIA:
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but
Aufidius got off.

MENENIUS:
And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that:
an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so
fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold
that's in them. Is the senate possessed of this?

VOLUMNIA:
Good ladies, let's go. Yes, yes, yes; the senate
has letters from the general, wherein he gives my
son the whole name of the war: he hath in this
action outdone his former deeds doubly

VALERIA:
In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.

MENENIUS:
Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his
true purchasing.

VIRGILIA:
The gods grant them true!

VOLUMNIA:
True! pow, wow.

MENENIUS:
True! I'll be sworn they are true.
Where is he wounded?
God save your good worships! Marcius is coming
home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?

VOLUMNIA:
I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be
large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall
stand for his place. He received in the repulse of
Tarquin seven hurts i' the body.

MENENIUS:
One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's
nine that I know.

VOLUMNIA:
He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
wounds upon him.

MENENIUS:
Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.
Hark! the trumpets.

VOLUMNIA:
These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he
carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears:
Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie;
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.

Herald:
Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight
Within Corioli gates: where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these
In honour follows Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

All:
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS:
No more of this; it does offend my heart:
Pray now, no more.

COMINIUS:
Look, sir, your mother!

CORIOLANUS:
O,
You have, I know, petition'd all the gods
For my prosperity!

VOLUMNIA:
Nay, my good soldier, up;
My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honour newly named,--
What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?--
But O, thy wife!

CORIOLANUS:
My gracious silence, hail!
Wouldst thou have laugh'd had I come coffin'd home,
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ay, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
And mothers that lack sons.

MENENIUS:
Now, the gods crown thee!

CORIOLANUS:
And live you yet?
O my sweet lady, pardon.

VOLUMNIA:
I know not where to turn: O, welcome home:
And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.

MENENIUS:
A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep
And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root on's heart,
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab-trees here
at home that will not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors:
We call a nettle but a nettle and
The faults of fools but folly.

COMINIUS:
Ever right.

CORIOLANUS:
Menenius ever, ever.

Herald:
Give way there, and go on!

CORIOLANUS:

VOLUMNIA:
I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy: only
There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.

CORIOLANUS:
Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Than sway with them in theirs.

COMINIUS:
On, to the Capitol!

BRUTUS:
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows,
Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil
Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slily crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.

SICINIUS:
On the sudden,
I warrant him consul.

BRUTUS:
Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.

SICINIUS:
He cannot temperately transport his honours
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.

BRUTUS:
In that there's comfort.

SICINIUS:
Doubt not
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honours, which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to do't.

BRUTUS:
I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i' the market-place nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility;
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To the people, beg their stinking breaths.

SICINIUS:
'Tis right.

BRUTUS:
It was his word: O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him,
And the desire of the nobles.

SICINIUS:
I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.

BRUTUS:
'Tis most like he will.

SICINIUS:
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
A sure destruction.

BRUTUS:
So it must fall out
To him or our authorities. For an end,
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that to's power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and
Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them,
In human action and capacity,
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in the war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.

SICINIUS:
This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want,
If he be put upon 't; and that's as easy
As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze
Shall darken him for ever.

BRUTUS:
What's the matter?

Messenger:
You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought
That Marcius shall be consul:
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and
The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers,
Upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended,
As to Jove's statue, and the commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:
I never saw the like.

BRUTUS:
Let's to the Capitol;
And carry with us ears and eyes for the time,
But hearts for the event.

SICINIUS:
Have with you.

First Officer:
Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand
for consulships?

Second Officer:
Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one
Coriolanus will carry it.

First Officer:
That's a brave fellow; but he's vengeance proud, and
loves not the common people.

Second Officer:
Faith, there had been many great men that have
flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there
be many that they have loved, they know not
wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why,
they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for
Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate
him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets
them plainly see't.

First Officer:
If he did not care whether he had their love or no,
he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither
good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater
devotion than can render it him; and leaves
nothing undone that may fully discover him their
opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and
displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he
dislikes, to flatter them for their love.

Second Officer:
He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his
ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who,
having been supple and courteous to the people,
bonneted, without any further deed to have them at
an into their estimation and report: but he hath so
planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions
in their hearts, that for their tongues to be
silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of
ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a
malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck
reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.

First Officer:
No more of him; he is a worthy man: make way, they
are coming.

MENENIUS:
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country: therefore,
please you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul, and last general
In our well-found successes, to report
A little of that worthy work perform'd
By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honours like himself.

First Senator:
Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital
Than we to stretch it out.
Masters o' the people,
We do request your kindest ears, and after,
Your loving motion toward the common body,
To yield what passes here.

SICINIUS:
We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts
Inclinable to honour and advance
The theme of our assembly.

BRUTUS:
Which the rather
We shall be blest to do, if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.

MENENIUS:
That's off, that's off;
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?

BRUTUS:
Most willingly;
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.

MENENIUS:
He loves your people
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.
Worthy Cominius, speak.
Nay, keep your place.

First Senator:
Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.

CORIOLANUS:
Your horror's pardon:
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.

BRUTUS:
Sir, I hope
My words disbench'd you not.

CORIOLANUS:
No, sir: yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but
your people,
I love them as they weigh.

MENENIUS:
Pray now, sit down.

CORIOLANUS:
I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monster'd.

MENENIUS:
Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
That's thousand to one good one--when you now see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
Than one on's ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.

COMINIUS:
I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be utter'd feebly. It is held
That valour is the chiefest virtue, and
Most dignifies the haver: if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him: be bestrid
An o'er-press'd Roman and i' the consul's view
Slew three opposers: Tarquin's self he met,
And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i' the field, and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurch'd all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioli, let me say,
I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers;
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport: as weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obey'd
And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd
The mortal gate of the city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off,
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioli like a planet: now all's his:
When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he; where he did
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if
'Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we call'd
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.

MENENIUS:
Worthy man!

First Senator:
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.

COMINIUS:
Our spoils he kick'd at,
And look'd upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world: he covets less
Than misery itself would give; rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.

MENENIUS:
He's right noble:
Let him be call'd for.

First Senator:
Call Coriolanus.

Officer:
He doth appear.

MENENIUS:
The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.

CORIOLANUS:
I do owe them still
My life and services.

MENENIUS:
It then remains
That you do speak to the people.

CORIOLANUS:
I do beseech you,
Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them,
For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you
That I may pass this doing.

SICINIUS:
Sir, the people
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.

MENENIUS:
Put them not to't:
Pray you, go fit you to the custom and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honour with your form.

CORIOLANUS:
It is apart
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.

BRUTUS:
Mark you that?

CORIOLANUS:
To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus;
Show them the unaching scars which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!

MENENIUS:
Do not stand upon't.
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honour.

Senators:
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!

BRUTUS:
You see how he intends to use the people.

SICINIUS:
May they perceive's intent! He will require them,
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.

BRUTUS:
Come, we'll inform them
Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace,
I know, they do attend us.

First Citizen:
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.

Second Citizen:
We may, sir, if we will.

Third Citizen:
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a
power that we have no power to do; for if he show us
his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our
tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if
he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him
our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful,
were to make a monster of the multitude: of the
which we being members, should bring ourselves to be
monstrous members.

First Citizen:
And to make us no better thought of, a little help
will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he
himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.

Third Citizen:
We have been called so of many; not that our heads
are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald,
but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and
truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of
one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south,
and their consent of one direct way should be at
once to all the points o' the compass.

Second Citizen:
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would
fly?

Third Citizen:
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's
will;'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but
if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.

Second Citizen:
Why that way?

Third Citizen:
To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts
melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return
for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.

Second Citizen:
You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.

Third Citizen:
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But
that's no matter, the greater part carries it. I
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
never a worthier man.
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his
behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and
by threes. He's to make his requests by
particulars; wherein every one of us has a single
honour, in giving him our own voices with our own
tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how
you shall go by him.

All:
Content, content.

MENENIUS:
O sir, you are not right: have you not known
The worthiest men have done't?

CORIOLANUS:
What must I say?
'I Pray, sir'--Plague upon't! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace:--'Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my country's service, when
Some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran
From the noise of our own drums.'

MENENIUS:
O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that: you must desire them
To think upon you.

CORIOLANUS:
Think upon me! hang 'em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by 'em.

MENENIUS:
You'll mar all:
I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.

CORIOLANUS:
Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.
So, here comes a brace.
You know the cause, air, of my standing here.

Third Citizen:
We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't.

CORIOLANUS:
Mine own desert.

Second Citizen:
Your own desert!

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, but not mine own desire.

Third Citizen:
How not your own desire?

CORIOLANUS:
No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the
poor with begging.

Third Citizen:
You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to
gain by you.

CORIOLANUS:
Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship?

First Citizen:
The price is to ask it kindly.

CORIOLANUS:
Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to
show you, which shall be yours in private. Your
good voice, sir; what say you?

Second Citizen:
You shall ha' it, worthy sir.

CORIOLANUS:
A match, sir. There's in all two worthy voices
begged. I have your alms: adieu.

Third Citizen:
But this is something odd.

Second Citizen:
An 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter.

CORIOLANUS:
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
voices that I may be consul, I have here the
customary gown.

Fourth Citizen:
You have deserved nobly of your country, and you
have not deserved nobly.

CORIOLANUS:
Your enigma?

Fourth Citizen:
You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have
been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved
the common people.

CORIOLANUS:
You should account me the more virtuous that I have
not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my
sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer
estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account
gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is
rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise
the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the
bewitchment of some popular man and give it
bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you,
I may be consul.

Fifth Citizen:
We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give
you our voices heartily.

Fourth Citizen:
You have received many wounds for your country.

CORIOLANUS:
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.

Both Citizens:
The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!

CORIOLANUS:
Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here,
To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear,
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to't:
What custom wills, in all things should we do't,
The dust on antique time would lie unswept,
And mountainous error be too highly heapt
For truth to o'er-peer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honour go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part suffer'd, the other will I do.
Here come more voices.
Your voices: for your voices I have fought;
Watch'd for your voices; for Your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more your voices:
Indeed I would be consul.

Sixth Citizen:
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest
man's voice.

Seventh Citizen:
Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy,
and make him good friend to the people!

All Citizens:
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!

CORIOLANUS:
Worthy voices!

MENENIUS:
You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes
Endue you with the people's voice: remains
That, in the official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the senate.

CORIOLANUS:
Is this done?

SICINIUS:
The custom of request you have discharged:
The people do admit you, and are summon'd
To meet anon, upon your approbation.

CORIOLANUS:
Where? at the senate-house?

SICINIUS:
There, Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS:
May I change these garments?

SICINIUS:
You may, sir.

CORIOLANUS:
That I'll straight do; and, knowing myself again,
Repair to the senate-house.

MENENIUS:
I'll keep you company. Will you along?

BRUTUS:
We stay here for the people.

SICINIUS:
Fare you well.
He has it now, and by his looks methink
'Tis warm at 's heart.

BRUTUS:
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.
will you dismiss the people?

SICINIUS:
How now, my masters! have you chose this man?

First Citizen:
He has our voices, sir.

BRUTUS:
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.

Second Citizen:
Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.

Third Citizen:
Certainly
He flouted us downright.

First Citizen:
No,'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.

Second Citizen:
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us
His marks of merit, wounds received for's country.

SICINIUS:
Why, so he did, I am sure.

Citizens:
No, no; no man saw 'em.

Third Citizen:
He said he had wounds, which he could show
in private;
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
'I would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore.' When we granted that,
Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you:
Your most sweet voices: now you have left
your voices,
I have no further with you.' Was not this mockery?

SICINIUS:
Why either were you ignorant to see't,
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?

BRUTUS:
Could you not have told him
As you were lesson'd, when he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I' the body of the weal; and now, arriving
A place of potency and sway o' the state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves? You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.

SICINIUS:
Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him pluck'd
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had call'd you up, have held him to
Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage,
You should have ta'en the advantage of his choler
And pass'd him unelected.

BRUTUS:
Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you,
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?

SICINIUS:
Have you
Ere now denied the asker? and now again
Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow
Your sued-for tongues?

Third Citizen:
He's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet.

Second Citizen:
And will deny him:
I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.

First Citizen:
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.

BRUTUS:
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties; make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefore kept to do so.

SICINIUS:
Let them assemble,
And on a safer judgment all revoke
Your ignorant election; enforce his pride,
And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorn'd you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
The apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.

BRUTUS:
Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured,
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.

SICINIUS:
Say, you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.

BRUTUS:
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you.
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o' the Marcians, from whence came
That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son,
Who, after great Hostilius, here was king;
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our beat water brought by conduits hither;
And  
Twice being  
Was his great ancestor.

SICINIUS:
One thus descended,
That hath beside well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.

BRUTUS:
Say, you ne'er had done't--
Harp on that still--but by our putting on;
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to the Capitol.

All:
We will so: almost all
Repent in their election.

BRUTUS:
Let them go on;
This mutiny were better put in hazard,
Than stay, past doubt, for greater:
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.

SICINIUS:
To the Capitol, come:
We will be there before the stream o' the people;
And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.

CORIOLANUS:
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?

LARTIUS:
He had, my lord; and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.

CORIOLANUS:
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.
Upon's again.

COMINIUS:
They are worn, lord consul, so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.

CORIOLANUS:
Saw you Aufidius?

LARTIUS:
On safe-guard he came to me; and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.

CORIOLANUS:
Spoke he of me?

LARTIUS:
He did, my lord.

CORIOLANUS:
How? what?

LARTIUS:
How often he had met you, sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be call'd your vanquisher.

CORIOLANUS:
At Antium lives he?

LARTIUS:
At Antium.

CORIOLANUS:
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them;
For they do prank them in authority,
Against all noble sufferance.

SICINIUS:
Pass no further.

CORIOLANUS:
Ha! what is that?

BRUTUS:
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.

CORIOLANUS:
What makes this change?

MENENIUS:
The matter?

COMINIUS:
Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?

BRUTUS:
Cominius, no.

CORIOLANUS:
Have I had children's voices?

First Senator:
Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.

BRUTUS:
The people are incensed against him.

SICINIUS:
Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.

CORIOLANUS:
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are
your offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?

MENENIUS:
Be calm, be calm.

CORIOLANUS:
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility:
Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.

BRUTUS:
Call't not a plot:
The people cry you mock'd them, and of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined;
Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.

CORIOLANUS:
Why, this was known before.

BRUTUS:
Not to them all.

CORIOLANUS:
Have you inform'd them sithence?

BRUTUS:
How! I inform them!

CORIOLANUS:
You are like to do such business.

BRUTUS:
Not unlike,
Each way, to better yours.

CORIOLANUS:
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.

SICINIUS:
You show too much of that
For which the people stir: if you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.

MENENIUS:
Let's be calm.

COMINIUS:
The people are abused; set on. This paltering
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely
I' the plain way of his merit.

CORIOLANUS:
Tell me of corn!
This was my speech, and I will speak't again--

MENENIUS:
Not now, not now.

First Senator:
Not in this heat, sir, now.

CORIOLANUS:
Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends,
I crave their pardons:
For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them
Regard me as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves: I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd,
and scatter'd,
By mingling them with us, the honour'd number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.

MENENIUS:
Well, no more.

First Senator:
No more words, we beseech you.

CORIOLANUS:
How! no more!
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles,
Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.

BRUTUS:
You speak o' the people,
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.

SICINIUS:
'Twere well
We let the people know't.

MENENIUS:
What, what? his choler?

CORIOLANUS:
Choler!
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, 'twould be my mind!

SICINIUS:
It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.

CORIOLANUS:
Shall remain!
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you
His absolute 'shall'?

COMINIUS:
'Twas from the canon.

CORIOLANUS:
'Shall'!
O good but most unwise patricians! why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory 'shall,' being but
The horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit
To say he'll turn your current in a ditch,
And make your channel his? If he have power
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learn'd,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators: and they are no less,
When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,'
His popular 'shall' against a graver bench
Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself!
It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
The one by the other.

COMINIUS:
Well, on to the market-place.

CORIOLANUS:
Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth
The corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
Sometime in Greece,--

MENENIUS:
Well, well, no more of that.

CORIOLANUS:
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.

BRUTUS:
Why, shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?

CORIOLANUS:
I'll give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war,
Even when the navel of the state was touch'd,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' the war
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd
Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation
Which they have often made against the senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the motive
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bisson multitude digest
The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
What's like to be their words: 'we did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands.' Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears; which will in time
Break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.

MENENIUS:
Come, enough.

BRUTUS:
Enough, with over-measure.

CORIOLANUS:
No, take more:
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship,
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom,
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance,--it must omit
Real necessities, and give way the while
To unstable slightness: purpose so barr'd,
it follows,
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,--
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on't, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That's sure of death without it, at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become't,
Not having the power to do the good it would,
For the in which doth control't.

BRUTUS:
Has said enough.

SICINIUS:
Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
As traitors do.

CORIOLANUS:
Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes?
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To the greater bench: in a rebellion,
When what's not meet, but what must be, was law,
Then were they chosen: in a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i' the dust.

BRUTUS:
Manifest treason!

SICINIUS:
This a consul? no.

BRUTUS:
The aediles, ho!
Let him be apprehended.

SICINIUS:
Go, call the people:
in whose name myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.

CORIOLANUS:
Hence, old goat!

Senators, &C:
We'll surety him.

COMINIUS:
Aged sir, hands off.

CORIOLANUS:
Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.

SICINIUS:
Help, ye citizens!

MENENIUS:
On both sides more respect.

SICINIUS:
Here's he that would take from you all your power.

BRUTUS:
Seize him, AEdiles!

Citizens:
Down with him! down with him!

Senators, &C:
Weapons, weapons, weapons!
'Tribunes!' 'Patricians!' 'Citizens!' 'What, ho!'
'Sicinius!' 'Brutus!' 'Coriolanus!' 'Citizens!'
'Peace, peace, peace!' 'Stay, hold, peace!'

MENENIUS:
What is about to be? I am out of breath;
Confusion's near; I cannot speak. You, tribunes
To the people! Coriolanus, patience!
Speak, good Sicinius.

SICINIUS:
Hear me, people; peace!

Citizens:
Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.

SICINIUS:
You are at point to lose your liberties:
Marcius would have all from you; Marcius,
Whom late you have named for consul.

MENENIUS:
Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

First Senator:
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.

SICINIUS:
What is the city but the people?

Citizens:
True,
The people are the city.

BRUTUS:
By the consent of all, we were establish'd
The people's magistrates.

Citizens:
You so remain.

MENENIUS:
And so are like to do.

COMINIUS:
That is the way to lay the city flat;
To bring the roof to the foundation,
And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,
In heaps and piles of ruin.

SICINIUS:
This deserves death.

BRUTUS:
Or let us stand to our authority,
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o' the people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy
Of present death.

SICINIUS:
Therefore lay hold of him;
Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.

BRUTUS:
AEdiles, seize him!

Citizens:
Yield, Marcius, yield!

MENENIUS:
Hear me one word;
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.

AEdile:
Peace, peace!

MENENIUS:

BRUTUS:
Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.

CORIOLANUS:
No, I'll die here.
There's some among you have beheld me fighting:
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

MENENIUS:
Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.

BRUTUS:
Lay hands upon him.

COMINIUS:
Help Marcius, help,
You that be noble; help him, young and old!

Citizens:
Down with him, down with him!

MENENIUS:
Go, get you to your house; be gone, away!
All will be naught else.

Second Senator:
Get you gone.

COMINIUS:
Stand fast;
We have as many friends as enemies.

MENENIUS:
Sham it be put to that?

First Senator:
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.

MENENIUS:
For 'tis a sore upon us,
You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.

COMINIUS:
Come, sir, along with us.

CORIOLANUS:
I would they were barbarians--as they are,
Though in Rome litter'd--not Romans--as they are not,
Though calved i' the porch o' the Capitol--

MENENIUS:
Be gone;
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue;
One time will owe another.

CORIOLANUS:
On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.

COMINIUS:
I could myself
Take up a brace o' the best of them; yea, the
two tribunes:
But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic;
And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands
Against a falling fabric. Will you hence,
Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and o'erbear
What they are used to bear.

MENENIUS:
Pray you, be gone:
I'll try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little: this must be patch'd
With cloth of any colour.

COMINIUS:
Nay, come away.

A Patrician:
This man has marr'd his fortune.

MENENIUS:
His nature is too noble for the world:
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Or Jove for's power to thunder. His heart's his mouth:
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent;
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.
Here's goodly work!

Second Patrician:
I would they were abed!

MENENIUS:
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!
Could he not speak 'em fair?

SICINIUS:
Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?

MENENIUS:
You worthy tribunes,--

SICINIUS:
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at nought.

First Citizen:
He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths,
And we their hands.

Citizens:
He shall, sure on't.

MENENIUS:
Sir, sir,--

SICINIUS:
Peace!

MENENIUS:
Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.

SICINIUS:
Sir, how comes't that you
Have holp to make this rescue?

MENENIUS:
Hear me speak:
As I do know the consul's worthiness,
So can I name his faults,--

SICINIUS:
Consul! what consul?

MENENIUS:
The consul Coriolanus.

BRUTUS:
He consul!

Citizens:
No, no, no, no, no.

MENENIUS:
If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two;
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.

SICINIUS:
Speak briefly then;
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor: to eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed
He dies to-night.

MENENIUS:
Now the good gods forbid
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enroll'd
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own!

SICINIUS:
He's a disease that must be cut away.

MENENIUS:
O, he's a limb that has but a disease;
Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy.
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath,
By many an ounce--he dropp'd it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country,
Were to us all, that do't and suffer it,
A brand to the end o' the world.

SICINIUS:
This is clean kam.

BRUTUS:
Merely awry: when he did love his country,
It honour'd him.

MENENIUS:
The service of the foot
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.

BRUTUS:
We'll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence:
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.

MENENIUS:
One word more, one word.
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds to's heels. Proceed by process;
Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out,
And sack great Rome with Romans.

BRUTUS:
If it were so,--

SICINIUS:
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.

MENENIUS:
Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer, by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.

First Senator:
Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.

SICINIUS:
Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the people's officer.
Masters, lay down your weapons.

BRUTUS:
Go not home.

SICINIUS:
Meet on the market-place. We'll attend you there:
Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed
In our first way.

MENENIUS:
I'll bring him to you.
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Or what is worst will follow.

First Senator:
Pray you, let's to him.

CORIOLANUS:
Let them puff all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.

A Patrician:
You do the nobler.

CORIOLANUS:
I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woollen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder,
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.
I talk of you:
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.

VOLUMNIA:
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on,
Before you had worn it out.

CORIOLANUS:
Let go.

VOLUMNIA:
You might have been enough the man you are,
With striving less to be so; lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions, if
You had not show'd them how ye were disposed
Ere they lack'd power to cross you.

CORIOLANUS:
Let them hang.

A Patrician:
Ay, and burn too.

MENENIUS:
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
too rough;
You must return and mend it.

First Senator:
There's no remedy;
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst, and perish.

VOLUMNIA:
Pray, be counsell'd:
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.

MENENIUS:
Well said, noble woman?
Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that
The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic
For the whole state, I would put mine armour on,
Which I can scarcely bear.

CORIOLANUS:
What must I do?

MENENIUS:
Return to the tribunes.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, what then? what then?

MENENIUS:
Repent what you have spoke.

CORIOLANUS:
For them! I cannot do it to the gods;
Must I then do't to them?

VOLUMNIA:
You are too absolute;
Though therein you can never be too noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends,
I' the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me,
In peace what each of them by the other lose,
That they combine not there.

CORIOLANUS:
Tush, tush!

MENENIUS:
A good demand.

VOLUMNIA:
If it be honour in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which, for your best ends,
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse,
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honour, as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?

CORIOLANUS:
Why force you this?

VOLUMNIA:
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To the people; not by your own instruction,
Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but rooted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonours you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honour: I am in this,
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em,
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.

MENENIUS:
Noble lady!
Come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.

VOLUMNIA:
I prithee now, my son,
Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand;
And thus far having stretch'd it--here be with them--
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils
Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.

MENENIUS:
This but done,
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free
As words to little purpose.

VOLUMNIA:
Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.

COMINIUS:
I have been i' the market-place; and, sir,'tis fit
You make strong party, or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence: all's in anger.

MENENIUS:
Only fair speech.

COMINIUS:
I think 'twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.

VOLUMNIA:
He must, and will
Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.

CORIOLANUS:
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce?
Must I with base tongue give my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do't:
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it
And throw't against the wind. To the market-place!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to the life.

COMINIUS:
Come, come, we'll prompt you.

VOLUMNIA:
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, I must do't:
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd,
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice
That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
The glasses of my sight! a beggar's tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees,
Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms! I will not do't,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth
And by my body's action teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.

VOLUMNIA:
At thy choice, then:
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin; let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list
Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.

CORIOLANUS:
Pray, be content:
Mother, I am going to the market-place;
Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going:
Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul;
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I' the way of flattery further.

VOLUMNIA:
Do your will.

COMINIUS:
Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself
To answer mildly; for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.

CORIOLANUS:
The word is 'mildly.' Pray you, let us go:
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honour.

MENENIUS:
Ay, but mildly.

CORIOLANUS:
Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!

BRUTUS:
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power: if he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne'er distributed.
What, will he come?

AEdile:
He's coming.

BRUTUS:
How accompanied?

AEdile:
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favour'd him.

SICINIUS:
Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured
Set down by the poll?

AEdile:
I have; 'tis ready.

SICINIUS:
Have you collected them by tribes?

AEdile:
I have.

SICINIUS:
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they bear me say 'It shall be so
I' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say fine, cry 'Fine;' if death, cry 'Death.'
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i' the truth o' the cause.

AEdile:
I shall inform them.

BRUTUS:
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.

AEdile:
Very well.

SICINIUS:
Make them be strong and ready for this hint,
When we shall hap to give 't them.

BRUTUS:
Go about it.
Put him to choler straight: he hath been used
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot
Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks
What's in his heart; and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.

SICINIUS:
Well, here he comes.

MENENIUS:
Calmly, I do beseech you.

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece
Will bear the knave by the volume. The honour'd gods
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! plant love among 's!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
And not our streets with war!

First Senator:
Amen, amen.

MENENIUS:
A noble wish.

SICINIUS:
Draw near, ye people.

AEdile:
List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!

CORIOLANUS:
First, hear me speak.

Both Tribunes:
Well, say. Peace, ho!

CORIOLANUS:
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?

SICINIUS:
I do demand,
If you submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you?

CORIOLANUS:
I am content.

MENENIUS:
Lo, citizens, he says he is content:
The warlike service he has done, consider; think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i' the holy churchyard.

CORIOLANUS:
Scratches with briers,
Scars to move laughter only.

MENENIUS:
Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier: do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier,
Rather than envy you.

COMINIUS:
Well, well, no more.

CORIOLANUS:
What is the matter
That being pass'd for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonour'd that the very hour
You take it off again?

SICINIUS:
Answer to us.

CORIOLANUS:
Say, then: 'tis true, I ought so.

SICINIUS:
We charge you, that you have contrived to take
From Rome all season'd office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical;
For which you are a traitor to the people.

CORIOLANUS:
How! traitor!

MENENIUS:
Nay, temperately; your promise.

CORIOLANUS:
The fires i' the lowest hell fold-in the people!
Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
'Thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.

SICINIUS:
Mark you this, people?

Citizens:
To the rock, to the rock with him!

SICINIUS:
Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge:
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes and here defying
Those whose great power must try him; even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves the extremest death.

BRUTUS:
But since he hath
Served well for Rome,--

CORIOLANUS:
What do you prate of service?

BRUTUS:
I talk of that, that know it.

CORIOLANUS:
You?

MENENIUS:
Is this the promise that you made your mother?

COMINIUS:
Know, I pray you,--

CORIOLANUS:
I know no further:
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word;
Nor cheque my courage for what they can give,
To have't with saying 'Good morrow.'

SICINIUS:
For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That do distribute it; in the name o' the people
And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city,
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian never more
To enter our Rome gates: i' the people's name,
I say it shall be so.

Citizens:
It shall be so, it shall be so; let him away:
He's banish'd, and it shall be so.

COMINIUS:
Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,--

SICINIUS:
He's sentenced; no more hearing.

COMINIUS:
Let me speak:
I have been consul, and can show for Rome
Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love
My country's good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase,
And treasure of my loins; then if I would
Speak that,--

SICINIUS:
We know your drift: speak what?

BRUTUS:
There's no more to be said, but he is banish'd,
As enemy to the people and his country:
It shall be so.

Citizens:
It shall be so, it shall be so.

CORIOLANUS:
You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate
As reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you;
And here remain with your uncertainty!
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts!
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders; till at length
Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels,
Making not reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes, deliver you as most
Abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising,
For you, the city, thus I turn my back:
There is a world elsewhere.

AEdile:
The people's enemy is gone, is gone!

Citizens:
Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!

SICINIUS:
Go, see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite;
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.

Citizens:
Come, come; let's see him out at gates; come.
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.

CORIOLANUS:
Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? you were used
To say extremity was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm all boats alike
Show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows,
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
A noble cunning: you were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conn'd them.

VIRGILIA:
O heavens! O heavens!

CORIOLANUS:
Nay! prithee, woman,--

VOLUMNIA:
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!

CORIOLANUS:
What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lack'd. Nay, mother.
Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved
Your husband so much sweat. Cominius,
Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother:
I'll do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's,
And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general,
I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women
'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
As 'tis to laugh at 'em. My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace: and
Believe't not lightly--though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen--your son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practise.

VOLUMNIA:
My first son.
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile: determine on some course,
More than a wild exposture to each chance
That starts i' the way before thee.

CORIOLANUS:
O the gods!

COMINIUS:
I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
O'er the vast world to seek a single man,
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I' the absence of the needer.

CORIOLANUS:
Fare ye well:
Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full
Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one
That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch, when I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.

MENENIUS:
That's worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
I'ld with thee every foot.

CORIOLANUS:
Give me thy hand: Come.

SICINIUS:
Bid them all home; he's gone, and we'll no further.
The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.

BRUTUS:
Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.

SICINIUS:
Bid them home:
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.

BRUTUS:
Dismiss them home.
Here comes his mother.

SICINIUS:
Let's not meet her.

BRUTUS:
Why?

SICINIUS:
They say she's mad.

BRUTUS:
They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.

VOLUMNIA:
O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods
Requite your love!

MENENIUS:
Peace, peace; be not so loud.

VOLUMNIA:
If that I could for weeping, you should hear,--
Nay, and you shall hear some.
Will you be gone?

VIRGILIA:

SICINIUS:
Are you mankind?

VOLUMNIA:
Ay, fool; is that a shame? Note but this fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?

SICINIUS:
O blessed heavens!

VOLUMNIA:
More noble blows than ever thou wise words;
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what; yet go:
Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son
Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.

SICINIUS:
What then?

VIRGILIA:
What then!
He'ld make an end of thy posterity.

VOLUMNIA:
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!

MENENIUS:
Come, come, peace.

SICINIUS:
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.

BRUTUS:
I would he had.

VOLUMNIA:
'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble:
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know.

BRUTUS:
Pray, let us go.

VOLUMNIA:
Now, pray, sir, get you gone:
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:--
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
This lady's husband here, this, do you see--
Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.

BRUTUS:
Well, well, we'll leave you.

SICINIUS:
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?

VOLUMNIA:
Take my prayers with you.
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em
But once a-day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to't.

MENENIUS:
You have told them home;
And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with me?

VOLUMNIA:
Anger's my meat; I sup upon myself,
And so shall starve with feeding. Come, let's go:
Leave this faint puling and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.

MENENIUS:
Fie, fie, fie!

Roman:
I know you well, sir, and you know
me: your name, I think, is Adrian.

Volsce:
It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.

Roman:
I am a Roman; and my services are,
as you are, against 'em: know you me yet?

Volsce:
Nicanor? no.

Roman:
The same, sir.

Volsce:
You had more beard when I last saw you; but your
favour is well approved by your tongue. What's the
news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state,
to find you out there: you have well saved me a
day's journey.

Roman:
There hath been in Rome strange insurrections; the
people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.

Volsce:
Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks not
so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and
hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.

Roman:
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
would make it flame again: for the nobles receive
so to heart the banishment of that worthy
Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take
all power from the people and to pluck from them
their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can
tell you, and is almost mature for the violent
breaking out.

Volsce:
Coriolanus banished!

Roman:
Banished, sir.

Volsce:
You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.

Roman:
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it
said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is
when she's fallen out with her husband. Your noble
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request
of his country.

Volsce:
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus
accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.

Roman:
I shall, between this and supper, tell you most
strange things from Rome; all tending to the good of
their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?

Volsce:
A most royal one; the centurions and their charges,
distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment,
and to be on foot at an hour's warning.

Roman:
I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the
man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.

Volsce:
You take my part from me, sir; I have the most cause
to be glad of yours.

Roman:
Well, let us go together.

CORIOLANUS:
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
'Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.
Save you, sir.

Citizen:
And you.

CORIOLANUS:
Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?

Citizen:
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.

CORIOLANUS:
Which is his house, beseech you?

Citizen:
This, here before you.

CORIOLANUS:
Thank you, sir: farewell.
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise,
Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep,
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon
This enemy town. I'll enter: if he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
I'll do his country service.

First Servingman:
Wine, wine, wine! What service
is here! I think our fellows are asleep.

Second Servingman:
Where's Cotus? my master calls
for him. Cotus!

CORIOLANUS:
A goodly house: the feast smells well; but I
Appear not like a guest.

First Servingman:
What would you have, friend? whence are you?
Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.

CORIOLANUS:
I have deserved no better entertainment,
In being Coriolanus.

Second Servingman:
Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
head; that he gives entrance to such companions?
Pray, get you out.

CORIOLANUS:
Away!

Second Servingman:
Away! get you away.

CORIOLANUS:
Now thou'rt troublesome.

Second Servingman:
Are you so brave? I'll have you talked with anon.

Third Servingman:
What fellow's this?

First Servingman:
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him
out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.

Third Servingman:
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid
the house.

CORIOLANUS:
Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth.

Third Servingman:
What are you?

CORIOLANUS:
A gentleman.

Third Servingman:
A marvellous poor one.

CORIOLANUS:
True, so I am.

Third Servingman:
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
station; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.

CORIOLANUS:
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.

Third Servingman:
What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a
strange guest he has here.

Second Servingman:
And I shall.

Third Servingman:
Where dwellest thou?

CORIOLANUS:
Under the canopy.

Third Servingman:
Under the canopy!

CORIOLANUS:
Ay.

Third Servingman:
Where's that?

CORIOLANUS:
I' the city of kites and crows.

Third Servingman:
I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!
Then thou dwellest with daws too?

CORIOLANUS:
No, I serve not thy master.

Third Servingman:
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?

CORIOLANUS:
Ay; 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy
mistress. Thou pratest, and pratest; serve with thy
trencher, hence!

AUFIDIUS:
Where is this fellow?

Second Servingman:
Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for
disturbing the lords within.

AUFIDIUS:
Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name?
Why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
If, Tullus,
Not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.

AUFIDIUS:
What is thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears,
And harsh in sound to thine.

AUFIDIUS:
Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in't; though thy tackle's torn.
Thou show'st a noble vessel: what's thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
Prepare thy brow to frown: know'st
thou me yet?

AUFIDIUS:
I know thee not: thy name?

CORIOLANUS:
My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service,
The extreme dangers and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname; a good memory,
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains;
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest;
And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be
Whoop'd out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope--
Mistake me not--to save my life, for if
I had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world
I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed
thee straight,
And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my canker'd country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes
Thou'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice;
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.

AUFIDIUS:
O Marcius, Marcius!
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things,
And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more
Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where against
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarr'd the moon with splinters: here I clip
The anvil of my sword, and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valour. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married; never man
Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee,
We have a power on foot; and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,
Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius,
Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy, and pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o'er-bear. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by the hands;
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.

CORIOLANUS:
You bless me, gods!

AUFIDIUS:
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
The one half of my commission; and set down--
As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st
Thy country's strength and weakness,--thine own ways;
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in:
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than e'er an enemy;
Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!

First Servingman:
Here's a strange alteration!

Second Servingman:
By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with
a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a
false report of him.

First Servingman:
What an arm he has! he turned me about with his
finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.

Second Servingman:
Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I
cannot tell how to term it.

First Servingman:
He had so; looking as it were--would I were hanged,
but I thought there was more in him than I could think.

Second Servingman:
So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest
man i' the world.

First Servingman:
I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.

Second Servingman:
Who, my master?

First Servingman:
Nay, it's no matter for that.

Second Servingman:
Worth six on him.

First Servingman:
Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the
greater soldier.

Second Servingman:
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that:
for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.

First Servingman:
Ay, and for an assault too.

Third Servingman:
O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!

First Servingman:
What, what, what? let's partake.

Third Servingman:
I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as
lieve be a condemned man.

First Servingman:
Wherefore? wherefore?

Third Servingman:
Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,
Caius Marcius.

First Servingman:
Why do you say 'thwack our general '?

Third Servingman:
I do not say 'thwack our general;' but he was always
good enough for him.

Second Servingman:
Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too
hard for him; I have heard him say so himself.

First Servingman:
He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
on't: before Corioli he scotched him and notched
him like a carbon ado.

Second Servingman:
An he had been cannibally given, he might have
broiled and eaten him too.

First Servingman:
But, more of thy news?

Third Servingman:
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son
and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' the table; no
question asked him by any of the senators, but they
stand bald before him: our general himself makes a
mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and
turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. But
the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i'
the middle and but one half of what he was
yesterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty
and grant of the whole table. He'll go, he says,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he
will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.

Second Servingman:
And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.

Third Servingman:
Do't! he will do't; for, look you, sir, he has as
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it
were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as
we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.

First Servingman:
Directitude! what's that?

Third Servingman:
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again,
and the man in blood, they will out of their
burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with
him.

First Servingman:
But when goes this forward?

Third Servingman:
To-morrow; to-day; presently; you shall have the
drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a
parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they
wipe their lips.

Second Servingman:
Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase
tailors, and breed ballad-makers.

First Servingman:
Let me have war, say I; it exceeds peace as far as
day does night; it's spritely, waking, audible, and
full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy;
mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more
bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.

Second Servingman:
'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to
be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a
great maker of cuckolds.

First Servingman:
Ay, and it makes men hate one another.

Third Servingman:
Reason; because they then less need one another.
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap
as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.

All:
In, in, in, in!

SICINIUS:
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him;
His remedies are tame i' the present peace
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by't, behold
Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see
Our tradesmen with in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.

BRUTUS:
We stood to't in good time.
Is this Menenius?

SICINIUS:
'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.

Both Tribunes:
Hail sir!

MENENIUS:
Hail to you both!

SICINIUS:
Your Coriolanus
Is not much miss'd, but with his friends:
The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do,
Were he more angry at it.

MENENIUS:
All's well; and might have been much better, if
He could have temporized.

SICINIUS:
Where is he, hear you?

MENENIUS:
Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife
Hear nothing from him.

Citizens:
The gods preserve you both!

SICINIUS:
God-den, our neighbours.

BRUTUS:
God-den to you all, god-den to you all.

First Citizen:
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
Are bound to pray for you both.

SICINIUS:
Live, and thrive!

BRUTUS:
Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.

Citizens:
Now the gods keep you!

Both Tribunes:
Farewell, farewell.

SICINIUS:
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets,
Crying confusion.

BRUTUS:
Caius Marcius was
A worthy officer i' the war; but insolent,
O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
Self-loving,--

SICINIUS:
And affecting one sole throne,
Without assistance.

MENENIUS:
I think not so.

SICINIUS:
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

BRUTUS:
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.

AEdile:
Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports, the Volsces with two several powers
Are enter'd in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before 'em.

MENENIUS:
'Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world;
Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.

SICINIUS:
Come, what talk you
Of Marcius?

BRUTUS:
Go see this rumourer whipp'd. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.

MENENIUS:
Cannot be!
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like have been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow,
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.

SICINIUS:
Tell not me:
I know this cannot be.

BRUTUS:
Not possible.

Messenger:
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the senate-house: some news is come
That turns their countenances.

SICINIUS:
'Tis this slave;--
Go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:--his raising;
Nothing but his report.

Messenger:
Yes, worthy sir,
The slave's report is seconded; and more,
More fearful, is deliver'd.

SICINIUS:
What more fearful?

Messenger:
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
How probable I do not know--that Marcius,
Join'd with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome,
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young'st and oldest thing.

SICINIUS:
This is most likely!

BRUTUS:
Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish
Good Marcius home again.

SICINIUS:
The very trick on't.

MENENIUS:
This is unlikely:
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violentest contrariety.

Second Messenger:
You are sent for to the senate:
A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories; and have already
O'erborne their way, consumed with fire, and took
What lay before them.

COMINIUS:
O, you have made good work!

MENENIUS:
What news? what news?

COMINIUS:
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,--

MENENIUS:
What's the news? what's the news?

COMINIUS:
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger's bore.

MENENIUS:
Pray now, your news?
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your news?--
If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians,--

COMINIUS:
If!
He is their god: he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him,
Against us brats, with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,
Or butchers killing flies.

MENENIUS:
You have made good work,
You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much
on the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic-eaters!

COMINIUS:
He will shake
Your Rome about your ears.

MENENIUS:
As Hercules
Did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work!

BRUTUS:
But is this true, sir?

COMINIUS:
Ay; and you'll look pale
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt; and who resist
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance,
And perish constant fools. Who is't can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.

MENENIUS:
We are all undone, unless
The noble man have mercy.

COMINIUS:
Who shall ask it?
The tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they
Should say 'Be good to Rome,' they charged him even
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
And therein show'd like enemies.

MENENIUS:
'Tis true:
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say 'Beseech you, cease.' You have made fair hands,
You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!

COMINIUS:
You have brought
A trembling upon Rome, such as was never
So incapable of help.

Both Tribunes:
Say not we brought it.

MENENIUS:
How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o' the city.

COMINIUS:
But I fear
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer: desperation
Is all the policy, strength and defence,
That Rome can make against them.

MENENIUS:
Here come the clusters.
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome, when you cast
Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming;
And not a hair upon a soldier's head
Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down,
And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter;
if he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.

Citizens:
Faith, we hear fearful news.

First Citizen:
For mine own part,
When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.

Second Citizen:
And so did I.

Third Citizen:
And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very
many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and
though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet
it was against our will.

COMINIUS:
Ye re goodly things, you voices!

MENENIUS:
You have made
Good work, you and your cry! Shall's to the Capitol?

COMINIUS:
O, ay, what else?

SICINIUS:
Go, masters, get you home; be not dismay'd:
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.

First Citizen:
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home.
I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished
him.

Second Citizen:
So did we all. But, come, let's home.

BRUTUS:
I do not like this news.

SICINIUS:
Nor I.

BRUTUS:
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie!

SICINIUS:
Pray, let us go.

AUFIDIUS:
Do they still fly to the Roman?

Lieutenant:
I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are darken'd in this action, sir,
Even by your own.

AUFIDIUS:
I cannot help it now,
Unless, by using means, I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him: yet his nature
In that's no changeling; and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.

Lieutenant:
Yet I wish, sir,--
I mean for your particular,--you had not
Join'd in commission with him; but either
Had borne the action of yourself, or else
To him had left it solely.

AUFIDIUS:
I understand thee well; and be thou sure,
when he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him. Although it seems,
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine,
Whene'er we come to our account.

Lieutenant:
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?

AUFIDIUS:
All places yield to him ere he sits down;
And the nobility of Rome are his:
The senators and patricians love him too:
The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First he was
A noble servant to them; but he could not
Carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controll'd the war; but one of these--
As he hath spices of them all, not all,
For I dare so far free him--made him fear'd,
So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit,
To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues
Lie in the interpretation of the time:
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
To extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail;
Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.

MENENIUS:
No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general; who loved him
In a most dear particular. He call'd me father:
But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him;
A mile before his tent fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd
To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.

COMINIUS:
He would not seem to know me.

MENENIUS:
Do you hear?

COMINIUS:
Yet one time he did call me by my name:
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
He would not answer to: forbad all names;
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire
Of burning Rome.

MENENIUS:
Why, so: you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have rack'd for Rome,
To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!

COMINIUS:
I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon
When it was less expected: he replied,
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punish'd.

MENENIUS:
Very well:
Could he say less?

COMINIUS:
I offer'd to awaken his regard
For's private friends: his answer to me was,
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly,
For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt,
And still to nose the offence.

MENENIUS:
For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains:
You are the musty chaff; and you are smelt
Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.

SICINIUS:
Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid
In this so never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.

MENENIUS:
No, I'll not meddle.

SICINIUS:
Pray you, go to him.

MENENIUS:
What should I do?

BRUTUS:
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Marcius.

MENENIUS:
Well, and say that Marcius
Return me, as Cominius is return'd,
Unheard; what then?
But as a discontented friend, grief-shot
With his unkindness? say't be so?

SICINIUS:
Yet your good will
must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure
As you intended well.

MENENIUS:
I'll undertake 't:
I think he'll hear me. Yet, to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined:
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd
These and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore I'll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I'll set upon him.

BRUTUS:
You know the very road into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.

MENENIUS:
Good faith, I'll prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.

COMINIUS:
He'll never hear him.

SICINIUS:
Not?

COMINIUS:
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury
The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him;
'Twas very faintly he said 'Rise;' dismiss'd me
Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do,
He sent in writing after me; what he would not,
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:
So that all hope is vain.
Unless his noble mother, and his wife;
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore, let's hence,
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.

First Senator:
Stay: whence are you?

Second Senator:
Stand, and go back.

MENENIUS:
You guard like men; 'tis well: but, by your leave,
I am an officer of state, and come
To speak with Coriolanus.

First Senator:
From whence?

MENENIUS:
From Rome.

First Senator:
You may not pass, you must return: our general
Will no more hear from thence.

Second Senator:
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You'll speak with Coriolanus.

MENENIUS:
Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.

First Senator:
Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name
Is not here passable.

MENENIUS:
I tell thee, fellow,
The general is my lover: I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His name unparallel'd, haply amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends,
Of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise
Have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.

First Senator:
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his
behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you
should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS:
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
always factionary on the party of your general.

Second Senator:
Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you
have, I am one that, telling true under him, must
say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS:
Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not
speak with him till after dinner.

First Senator:
You are a Roman, are you?

MENENIUS:
I am, as thy general is.

First Senator:
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,
when you have pushed out your gates the very
defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with
the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the
intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with
such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived;
therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your
execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn
you out of reprieve and pardon.

MENENIUS:
Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would
use me with estimation.

Second Senator:
Come, my captain knows you not.

MENENIUS:
I mean, thy general.

First Senator:
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest
I let forth your half-pint of blood; back,--that's
the utmost of your having: back.

MENENIUS:
Nay, but, fellow, fellow,--

CORIOLANUS:
What's the matter?

MENENIUS:
Now, you companion, I'll say an errand for you:
You shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall
perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from
my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment
with him, if thou standest not i' the state of
hanging, or of some death more long in
spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now
presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee.
The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy
particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than
thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son!
thou art preparing fire for us; look thee, here's
water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to
thee; but being assured none but myself could move
thee, I have been blown out of your gates with
sighs; and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy
petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy
wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet
here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my
access to thee.

CORIOLANUS:
Away!

MENENIUS:
How! away!

CORIOLANUS:
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others: though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake
And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st!

AUFIDIUS:
You keep a constant temper.

First Senator:
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?

Second Senator:
'Tis a spell, you see, of much power: you know the
way home again.

First Senator:
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
greatness back?

Second Senator:
What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?

MENENIUS:
I neither care for the world nor your general: for
such things as you, I can scarce think there's any,
ye're so slight. He that hath a will to die by
himself fears it not from another: let your general
do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and
your misery increase with your age! I say to you,
as I was said to, Away!

First Senator:
A noble fellow, I warrant him.

Second Senator:
The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the
oak not to be wind-shaken.

CORIOLANUS:
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly
I have borne this business.

AUFIDIUS:
Only their ends
You have respected; stopp'd your ears against
The general suit of Rome; never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.

CORIOLANUS:
This last old man,
Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father;
Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him; for whose old love I have,
Though I show'd sourly to him, once more offer'd
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept; to grace him only
That thought he could do more, a very little
I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time 'tis made? I will not.
My wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows;
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod: and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession, which
Great nature cries 'Deny not.' let the Volsces
Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand,
As if a man were author of himself
And knew no other kin.

VIRGILIA:
My lord and husband!

CORIOLANUS:
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

VIRGILIA:
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.

CORIOLANUS:
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny; but do not say
For that 'Forgive our Romans.' O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip
Hath virgin'd it e'er since. You gods! I prate,
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth;
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.

VOLUMNIA:
O, stand up blest!
Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,
I kneel before thee; and unproperly
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.

CORIOLANUS:
What is this?
Your knees to me? to your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun;
Murdering impossibility, to make
What cannot be, slight work.

VOLUMNIA:
Thou art my warrior;
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?

CORIOLANUS:
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That's curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria!

VOLUMNIA:
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.

CORIOLANUS:
The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee!

VOLUMNIA:
Your knee, sirrah.

CORIOLANUS:
That's my brave boy!

VOLUMNIA:
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,
Are suitors to you.

CORIOLANUS:
I beseech you, peace:
Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate
Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not
To ally my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.

VOLUMNIA:
O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us any thing;
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already: yet we will ask;
That, if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.

CORIOLANUS:
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we'll
Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?

VOLUMNIA:
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither: since that thy sight,
which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance
with comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow;
Making the mother, wife and child to see
The son, the husband and the father tearing
His country's bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy; for how can we,
Alas, how can we for our country pray.
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win: for either thou
Must, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles thorough our streets, or else
triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin,
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Trust to't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb,
That brought thee to this world.

VIRGILIA:
Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name
Living to time.

Young MARCIUS:
A' shall not tread on me;
I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.

CORIOLANUS:
Not of a woman's tenderness to be,
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.
I have sat too long.

VOLUMNIA:
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us,
As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit
Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces
May say 'This mercy we have show'd;' the Romans,
'This we received;' and each in either side
Give the all-hail to thee and cry 'Be blest
For making up this peace!' Thou know'st, great son,
The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name,
Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses;
Whose chronicle thus writ: 'The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out;
Destroy'd his country, and his name remains
To the ensuing age abhorr'd.' Speak to me, son:
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,
To imitate the graces of the gods;
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air,
And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy:
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons. There's no man in the world
More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate
Like one i' the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy,
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honour. Say my request's unjust,
And spurn me back: but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee,
That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
To a mother's part belongs. He turns away:
Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end;
This is the last: so we will home to Rome,
And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold 's:
This boy, that cannot tell what he would have
But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny 't. Come, let us go:
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;
His wife is in Corioli and his child
Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch:
I am hush'd until our city be a-fire,
And then I'll speak a little.

CORIOLANUS:
O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome;
But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it,
Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd,
If not most mortal to him. But, let it come.
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?

AUFIDIUS:
I was moved withal.

CORIOLANUS:
I dare be sworn you were:
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part,
I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you; and pray you,
Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!

AUFIDIUS:

CORIOLANUS:
Ay, by and by;
But we will drink together; and you shall bear
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have counter-seal'd.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you: all the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.

MENENIUS:
See you yond coign o' the Capitol, yond
corner-stone?

SICINIUS:
Why, what of that?

MENENIUS:
If it be possible for you to displace it with your
little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.
But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are
sentenced and stay upon execution.

SICINIUS:
Is't possible that so short a time can alter the
condition of a man!

MENENIUS:
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly;
yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown
from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a
creeping thing.

SICINIUS:
He loved his mother dearly.

MENENIUS:
So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother
now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness
of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he
moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before
his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with
his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a
battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
and a heaven to throne in.

SICINIUS:
Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.

MENENIUS:
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his
mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy
in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that
shall our poor city find: and all this is long of
you.

SICINIUS:
The gods be good unto us!

MENENIUS:
No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto
us. When we banished him, we respected not them;
and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.

Messenger:
Sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house:
The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing, if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They'll give him death by inches.

SICINIUS:
What's the news?

Second Messenger:
Good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd,
The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone:
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.

SICINIUS:
Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?

Second Messenger:
As certain as I know the sun is fire:
Where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it?
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,
Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,
Make the sun dance. Hark you!

MENENIUS:
This is good news:
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
A city full; of tribunes, such as you,
A sea and land full. You have pray'd well to-day:
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!

SICINIUS:
First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,
Accept my thankfulness.

Second Messenger:
Sir, we have all
Great cause to give great thanks.

SICINIUS:
They are near the city?

Second Messenger:
Almost at point to enter.

SICINIUS:
We will meet them,
And help the joy.

First Senator:
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them:
Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
Cry 'Welcome, ladies, welcome!'

All:
Welcome, ladies, Welcome!

AUFIDIUS:
Go tell the lords o' the city I am here:
Deliver them this paper: having read it,
Bid them repair to the market place; where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath enter'd and
Intends to appear before the people, hoping
To purge herself with words: dispatch.
Most welcome!

First Conspirator:
How is it with our general?

AUFIDIUS:
Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoison'd,
And with his charity slain.

Second Conspirator:
Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you
Of your great danger.

AUFIDIUS:
Sir, I cannot tell:
We must proceed as we do find the people.

Third Conspirator:
The people will remain uncertain whilst
'Twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.

AUFIDIUS:
I know it;
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawn'd
Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd,
He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and, to this end,
He bow'd his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable and free.

Third Conspirator:
Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping,--

AUFIDIUS:
That I would have spoke of:
Being banish'd for't, he came unto my hearth;
Presented to my knife his throat: I took him;
Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong: till, at the last,
I seem'd his follower, not partner, and
He waged me with his countenance, as if
I had been mercenary.

First Conspirator:
So he did, my lord:
The army marvell'd at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we look'd
For no less spoil than glory,--

AUFIDIUS:
There was it:
For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
Of our great action: therefore shall he die,
And I'll renew me in his fall. But, hark!

First Conspirator:
Your native town you enter'd like a post,
And had no welcomes home: but he returns,
Splitting the air with noise.

Second Conspirator:
And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.

Third Conspirator:
Therefore, at your vantage,
Ere he express himself, or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.

AUFIDIUS:
Say no more:
Here come the lords.

All The Lords:
You are most welcome home.

AUFIDIUS:
I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?

Lords:
We have.

First Lord:
And grieve to hear't.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines: but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.

AUFIDIUS:
He approaches: you shall hear him.

CORIOLANUS:
Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier,
No more infected with my country's love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home
Do more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honour to the Antiates
Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver,
Subscribed by the consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o' the senate, what
We have compounded on.

AUFIDIUS:
Read it not, noble lords;
But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree
He hath abused your powers.

CORIOLANUS:
Traitor! how now!

AUFIDIUS:
Ay, traitor, Marcius!

CORIOLANUS:
Marcius!

AUFIDIUS:
Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think
I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
Coriolanus in Corioli?
You lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously
He has betray'd your business, and given up,
For certain drops of salt, your city Rome,
I say 'your city,' to his wife and mother;
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears
He whined and roar'd away your victory,
That pages blush'd at him and men of heart
Look'd wondering each at other.

CORIOLANUS:
Hear'st thou, Mars?

AUFIDIUS:
Name not the god, thou boy of tears!

CORIOLANUS:
Ha!

AUFIDIUS:
No more.

CORIOLANUS:
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave!
Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,
Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion--
Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him; that
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.

First Lord:
Peace, both, and hear me speak.

CORIOLANUS:
Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound!
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there,
That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I
Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli:
Alone I did it. Boy!

AUFIDIUS:
Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
'Fore your own eyes and ears?

All Conspirators:
Let him die for't.

All The People:
'Tear him to pieces.' 'Do it presently.' 'He kill'd
my son.' 'My daughter.' 'He killed my cousin
Marcus.' 'He killed my father.'

Second Lord:
Peace, ho! no outrage: peace!
The man is noble and his fame folds-in
This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.

CORIOLANUS:
O that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword!

AUFIDIUS:
Insolent villain!

All Conspirators:
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!

Lords:
Hold, hold, hold, hold!

AUFIDIUS:
My noble masters, hear me speak.

First Lord:
O Tullus,--

Second Lord:
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.

Third Lord:
Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet;
Put up your swords.

AUFIDIUS:
My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger
Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours
To call me to your senate, I'll deliver
Myself your loyal servant, or endure
Your heaviest censure.

First Lord:
Bear from hence his body;
And mourn you for him: let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.

Second Lord:
His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let's make the best of it.

AUFIDIUS:
My rage is gone;
And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up.
Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; I'll be one.
Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully:
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.

GLOUCESTER:
Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by this sun of York;
And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
Grim-visaged war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front;
And now, instead of mounting barded steeds
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty
To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,
Deformed, unfinish'd, sent before my time
Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionable
That dogs bark at me as I halt by them;
Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to spy my shadow in the sun
And descant on mine own deformity:
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
I am determined to prove a villain
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous,
By drunken prophecies, libels and dreams,
To set my brother Clarence and the king
In deadly hate the one against the other:
And if King Edward be as true and just
As I am subtle, false and treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mew'd up,
About a prophecy, which says that 'G'
Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be.
Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here
Clarence comes.
Brother, good day; what means this armed guard
That waits upon your grace?

CLARENCE:
His majesty
Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed
This conduct to convey me to the Tower.

GLOUCESTER:
Upon what cause?

CLARENCE:
Because my name is George.

GLOUCESTER:
Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours;
He should, for that, commit your godfathers:
O, belike his majesty hath some intent
That you shall be new-christen'd in the Tower.
But what's the matter, Clarence?  may I know?

CLARENCE:
Yea, Richard, when I know; for I protest
As yet I do not: but, as I can learn,
He hearkens after prophecies and dreams;
And from the cross-row plucks the letter G.
And says a wizard told him that by G
His issue disinherited should be;
And, for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought that I am he.
These, as I learn, and such like toys as these
Have moved his highness to commit me now.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women:
'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower:
My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she
That tempers him to this extremity.
Was it not she and that good man of worship,
Anthony Woodville, her brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,
From whence this present day he is deliver'd?
We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.

CLARENCE:
By heaven, I think there's no man is secure
But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds
That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.
Heard ye not what an humble suppliant
Lord hastings was to her for his delivery?

GLOUCESTER:
Humbly complaining to her deity
Got my lord chamberlain his liberty.
I'll tell you what; I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favour with the king,
To be her men and wear her livery:
The jealous o'erworn widow and herself,
Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen.
Are mighty gossips in this monarchy.

BRAKENBURY:
I beseech your graces both to pardon me;
His majesty hath straitly given in charge
That no man shall have private conference,
Of what degree soever, with his brother.

GLOUCESTER:
Even so; an't please your worship, Brakenbury,
You may partake of any thing we say:
We speak no treason, man: we say the king
Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen
Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous;
We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot,
A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;
And that the queen's kindred are made gentle-folks:
How say you sir? Can you deny all this?

BRAKENBURY:
With this, my lord, myself have nought to do.

GLOUCESTER:
Naught to do with mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow,
He that doth naught with her, excepting one,
Were best he do it secretly, alone.

BRAKENBURY:
What one, my lord?

GLOUCESTER:
Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me?

BRAKENBURY:
I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal
Forbear your conference with the noble duke.

CLARENCE:
We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.

GLOUCESTER:
We are the queen's abjects, and must obey.
Brother, farewell: I will unto the king;
And whatsoever you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edward's widow sister,
I will perform it to enfranchise you.
Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood
Touches me deeper than you can imagine.

CLARENCE:
I know it pleaseth neither of us well.

GLOUCESTER:
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long;
Meantime, have patience.

CLARENCE:
I must perforce. Farewell.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.
Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so,
That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven,
If heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? the new-deliver'd Hastings?

HASTINGS:
Good time of day unto my gracious lord!

GLOUCESTER:
As much unto my good lord chamberlain!
Well are you welcome to the open air.
How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment?

HASTINGS:
With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must:
But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.

GLOUCESTER:
No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too;
For they that were your enemies are his,
And have prevail'd as much on him as you.

HASTINGS:
More pity that the eagle should be mew'd,
While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.

GLOUCESTER:
What news abroad?

HASTINGS:
No news so bad abroad as this at home;
The King is sickly, weak and melancholy,
And his physicians fear him mightily.

GLOUCESTER:
Now, by Saint Paul, this news is bad indeed.
O, he hath kept an evil diet long,
And overmuch consumed his royal person:
'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.
What, is he in his bed?

HASTINGS:
He is.

GLOUCESTER:
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot live, I hope; and must not die
Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven.
I'll in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence,
With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments;
And, if I fall not in my deep intent,
Clarence hath not another day to live:
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
And leave the world for me to bustle in!
For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter.
What though I kill'd her husband and her father?
The readiest way to make the wench amends
Is to become her husband and her father:
The which will I; not all so much for love
As for another secret close intent,
By marrying her which I must reach unto.
But yet I run before my horse to market:
Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns:
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.

LADY ANNE:
Set down, set down your honourable load,
If honour may be shrouded in a hearse,
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king!
Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster!
Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood!
Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost,
To hear the lamentations of Poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughter'd son,
Stabb'd by the selfsame hand that made these wounds!
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life,
I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.
Cursed be the hand that made these fatal holes!
Cursed be the heart that had the heart to do it!
Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence!
More direful hap betide that hated wretch,
That makes us wretched by the death of thee,
Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads,
Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives!
If ever he have child, abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural aspect
May fright the hopeful mother at the view;
And that be heir to his unhappiness!
If ever he have wife, let her he made
A miserable by the death of him
As I am made by my poor lord and thee!
Come, now towards Chertsey with your holy load,
Taken from Paul's to be interred there;
And still, as you are weary of the weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse.

GLOUCESTER:
Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.

LADY ANNE:
What black magician conjures up this fiend,
To stop devoted charitable deeds?

GLOUCESTER:
Villains, set down the corse; or, by Saint Paul,
I'll make a corse of him that disobeys.

Gentleman:
My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.

GLOUCESTER:
Unmanner'd dog! stand thou, when I command:
Advance thy halbert higher than my breast,
Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot,
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.

LADY ANNE:
What, do you tremble? are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not; for you are mortal,
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.
Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body,
His soul thou canst not have; therefore be gone.

GLOUCESTER:
Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.

LADY ANNE:
Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us not;
For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,
Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.
O, gentlemen, see, see! dead Henry's wounds
Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh!
Blush, Blush, thou lump of foul deformity;
For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty veins, where no blood dwells;
Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural,
Provokes this deluge most unnatural.
O God, which this blood madest, revenge his death!
O earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death!
Either heaven with lightning strike the
murderer dead,
Or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick,
As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood
Which his hell-govern'd arm hath butchered!

GLOUCESTER:
Lady, you know no rules of charity,
Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.

LADY ANNE:
Villain, thou know'st no law of God nor man:
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.

GLOUCESTER:
But I know none, and therefore am no beast.

LADY ANNE:
O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!

GLOUCESTER:
More wonderful, when angels are so angry.
Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,
Of these supposed-evils, to give me leave,
By circumstance, but to acquit myself.

LADY ANNE:
Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man,
For these known evils, but to give me leave,
By circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.

GLOUCESTER:
Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse myself.

LADY ANNE:
Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
No excuse current, but to hang thyself.

GLOUCESTER:
By such despair, I should accuse myself.

LADY ANNE:
And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused;
For doing worthy vengeance on thyself,
Which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.

GLOUCESTER:
Say that I slew them not?

LADY ANNE:
Why, then they are not dead:
But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.

GLOUCESTER:
I did not kill your husband.

LADY ANNE:
Why, then he is alive.

GLOUCESTER:
Nay, he is dead; and slain by Edward's hand.

LADY ANNE:
In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw
Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood;
The which thou once didst bend against her breast,
But that thy brothers beat aside the point.

GLOUCESTER:
I was provoked by her slanderous tongue,
which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.

LADY ANNE:
Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind.
Which never dreamt on aught but butcheries:
Didst thou not kill this king?

GLOUCESTER:
I grant ye.

LADY ANNE:
Dost grant me, hedgehog? then, God grant me too
Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed!
O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous!

GLOUCESTER:
The fitter for the King of heaven, that hath him.

LADY ANNE:
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.

GLOUCESTER:
Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither;
For he was fitter for that place than earth.

LADY ANNE:
And thou unfit for any place but hell.

GLOUCESTER:
Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.

LADY ANNE:
Some dungeon.

GLOUCESTER:
Your bed-chamber.

LADY ANNE:
I'll rest betide the chamber where thou liest!

GLOUCESTER:
So will it, madam till I lie with you.

LADY ANNE:
I hope so.

GLOUCESTER:
I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
And fall somewhat into a slower method,
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,
As blameful as the executioner?

LADY ANNE:
Thou art the cause, and most accursed effect.

GLOUCESTER:
Your beauty was the cause of that effect;
Your beauty: which did haunt me in my sleep
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.

LADY ANNE:
If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide,
These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.

GLOUCESTER:
These eyes could never endure sweet beauty's wreck;
You should not blemish it, if I stood by:
As all the world is cheered by the sun,
So I by that; it is my day, my life.

LADY ANNE:
Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life!

GLOUCESTER:
Curse not thyself, fair creature thou art both.

LADY ANNE:
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.

GLOUCESTER:
It is a quarrel most unnatural,
To be revenged on him that loveth you.

LADY ANNE:
It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
To be revenged on him that slew my husband.

GLOUCESTER:
He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband,
Did it to help thee to a better husband.

LADY ANNE:
His better doth not breathe upon the earth.

GLOUCESTER:
He lives that loves thee better than he could.

LADY ANNE:
Name him.

GLOUCESTER:
Plantagenet.

LADY ANNE:
Why, that was he.

GLOUCESTER:
The selfsame name, but one of better nature.

LADY ANNE:
Where is he?

GLOUCESTER:
Here.
Why dost thou spit at me?

LADY ANNE:
Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake!

GLOUCESTER:
Never came poison from so sweet a place.

LADY ANNE:
Never hung poison on a fouler toad.
Out of my sight! thou dost infect my eyes.

GLOUCESTER:
Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.

LADY ANNE:
Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead!

GLOUCESTER:
I would they were, that I might die at once;
For now they kill me with a living death.
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,
Shamed their aspect with store of childish drops:
These eyes that never shed remorseful tear,
No, when my father York and Edward wept,
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;
Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,
Told the sad story of my father's death,
And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,
That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks
Like trees bedash'd with rain: in that sad time
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,
Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
I never sued to friend nor enemy;
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word;
But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword;
Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom.
And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee.
Nay, do not pause; for I did kill King Henry,
But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.
Nay, now dispatch; 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward,
But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
Take up the sword again, or take up me.

LADY ANNE:
Arise, dissembler: though I wish thy death,
I will not be the executioner.

GLOUCESTER:
Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it.

LADY ANNE:
I have already.

GLOUCESTER:
Tush, that was in thy rage:
Speak it again, and, even with the word,
That hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love,
Shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love;
To both their deaths thou shalt be accessary.

LADY ANNE:
I would I knew thy heart.

GLOUCESTER:
'Tis figured in my tongue.

LADY ANNE:
I fear me both are false.

GLOUCESTER:
Then never man was true.

LADY ANNE:
Well, well, put up your sword.

GLOUCESTER:
Say, then, my peace is made.

LADY ANNE:
That shall you know hereafter.

GLOUCESTER:
But shall I live in hope?

LADY ANNE:
All men, I hope, live so.

GLOUCESTER:
Vouchsafe to wear this ring.

LADY ANNE:
To take is not to give.

GLOUCESTER:
Look, how this ring encompasseth finger.
Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart;
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted suppliant may
But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,
Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.

LADY ANNE:
What is it?

GLOUCESTER:
That it would please thee leave these sad designs
To him that hath more cause to be a mourner,
And presently repair to Crosby Place;
Where, after I have solemnly interr'd
At Chertsey monastery this noble king,
And wet his grave with my repentant tears,
I will with all expedient duty see you:
For divers unknown reasons. I beseech you,
Grant me this boon.

LADY ANNE:
With all my heart; and much it joys me too,
To see you are become so penitent.
Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.

GLOUCESTER:
Bid me farewell.

LADY ANNE:
'Tis more than you deserve;
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said farewell already.

GLOUCESTER:
Sirs, take up the corse.

GENTLEMEN:
Towards Chertsey, noble lord?

GLOUCESTER:
No, to White-Friars; there attend my coining.
Was ever woman in this humour woo'd?
Was ever woman in this humour won?
I'll have her; but I will not keep her long.
What! I, that kill'd her husband and his father,
To take her in her heart's extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of her hatred by;
Having God, her conscience, and these bars
against me,
And I nothing to back my suit at all,
But the plain devil and dissembling looks,
And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!
Ha!
Hath she forgot already that brave prince,
Edward, her lord, whom I, some three months since,
Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewksbury?
A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,
Framed in the prodigality of nature,
Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,
The spacious world cannot again afford
And will she yet debase her eyes on me,
That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince,
And made her widow to a woful bed?
On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety?
On me, that halt and am unshapen thus?
My dukedom to a beggarly denier,
I do mistake my person all this while:
Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot,
Myself to be a marvellous proper man.
I'll be at charges for a looking-glass,
And entertain some score or two of tailors,
To study fashions to adorn my body:
Since I am crept in favour with myself,
Will maintain it with some little cost.
But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave;
And then return lamenting to my love.
Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my shadow as I pass.

RIVERS:
Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty
Will soon recover his accustom'd health.

GREY:
In that you brook it in, it makes him worse:
Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort,
And cheer his grace with quick and merry words.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
If he were dead, what would betide of me?

RIVERS:
No other harm but loss of such a lord.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The loss of such a lord includes all harm.

GREY:
The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son,
To be your comforter when he is gone.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Oh, he is young and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.

RIVERS:
Is it concluded that he shall be protector?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
It is determined, not concluded yet:
But so it must be, if the king miscarry.

GREY:
Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby.

BUCKINGHAM:
Good time of day unto your royal grace!

DERBY:
God make your majesty joyful as you have been!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby.
To your good prayers will scarcely say amen.
Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife,
And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.

DERBY:
I do beseech you, either not believe
The envious slanders of her false accusers;
Or, if she be accused in true report,
Bear with her weakness, which, I think proceeds
From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.

RIVERS:
Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby?

DERBY:
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I
Are come from visiting his majesty.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What likelihood of his amendment, lords?

BUCKINGHAM:
Madam, good hope; his grace speaks cheerfully.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
God grant him health! Did you confer with him?

BUCKINGHAM:
Madam, we did: he desires to make atonement
Betwixt the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,
And betwixt them and my lord chamberlain;
And sent to warn them to his royal presence.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Would all were well! but that will never be
I fear our happiness is at the highest.

GLOUCESTER:
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it:
Who are they that complain unto the king,
That I, forsooth, am stern, and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly
That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.
Because I cannot flatter and speak fair,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog,
Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorous enemy.
Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused
By silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?

RIVERS:
To whom in all this presence speaks your grace?

GLOUCESTER:
To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.
When have I injured thee? when done thee wrong?
Or thee? or thee? or any of your faction?
A plague upon you all! His royal person,--
Whom God preserve better than you would wish!--
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing-while,
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.
The king, of his own royal disposition,
And not provoked by any suitor else;
Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred,
Which in your outward actions shows itself
Against my kindred, brothers, and myself,
Makes him to send; that thereby he may gather
The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it.

GLOUCESTER:
I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad,
That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch:
Since every Jack became a gentleman
There's many a gentle person made a Jack.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Come, come, we know your meaning, brother
Gloucester;
You envy my advancement and my friends':
God grant we never may have need of you!

GLOUCESTER:
Meantime, God grants that we have need of you:
Your brother is imprison'd by your means,
Myself disgraced, and the nobility
Held in contempt; whilst many fair promotions
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
By Him that raised me to this careful height
From that contented hap which I enjoy'd,
I never did incense his majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My lord, you do me shameful injury,
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.

GLOUCESTER:
You may deny that you were not the cause
Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.

RIVERS:
She may, my lord, for--

GLOUCESTER:
She may, Lord Rivers! why, who knows not so?
She may do more, sir, than denying that:
She may help you to many fair preferments,
And then deny her aiding hand therein,
And lay those honours on your high deserts.
What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she--

RIVERS:
What, marry, may she?

GLOUCESTER:
What, marry, may she! marry with a king,
A bachelor, a handsome stripling too:
I wis your grandam had a worser match.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne
Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs:
By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty
With those gross taunts I often have endured.
I had rather be a country servant-maid
Than a great queen, with this condition,
To be thus taunted, scorn'd, and baited at:
Small joy have I in being England's queen.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And lessen'd be that small, God, I beseech thee!
Thy honour, state and seat is due to me.

GLOUCESTER:
What! threat you me with telling of the king?
Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said
I will avouch in presence of the king:
I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.
'Tis time to speak; my pains are quite forgot.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Out, devil! I remember them too well:
Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower,
And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.

GLOUCESTER:
Ere you were queen, yea, or your husband king,
I was a pack-horse in his great affairs;
A weeder-out of his proud adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his friends:
To royalize his blood I spilt mine own.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Yea, and much better blood than his or thine.

GLOUCESTER:
In all which time you and your husband Grey
Were factious for the house of Lancaster;
And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband
In Margaret's battle at Saint Alban's slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget,
What you have been ere now, and what you are;
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

QUEEN MARGARET:
A murderous villain, and so still thou art.

GLOUCESTER:
Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick;
Yea, and forswore himself,--which Jesu pardon!--

QUEEN MARGARET:
Which God revenge!

GLOUCESTER:
To fight on Edward's party for the crown;
And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd up.
I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's;
Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine
I am too childish-foolish for this world.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world,
Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.

RIVERS:
My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days
Which here you urge to prove us enemies,
We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king:
So should we you, if you should be our king.

GLOUCESTER:
If I should be! I had rather be a pedlar:
Far be it from my heart, the thought of it!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
As little joy, my lord, as you suppose
You should enjoy, were you this country's king,
As little joy may you suppose in me.
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof.

QUEEN MARGARET:
A little joy enjoys the queen thereof;
For I am she, and altogether joyless.
I can no longer hold me patient.
Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out
In sharing that which you have pill'd from me!
Which of you trembles not that looks on me?
If not, that, I being queen, you bow like subjects,
Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels?
O gentle villain, do not turn away!

GLOUCESTER:
Foul wrinkled witch, what makest thou in my sight?

QUEEN MARGARET:
But repetition of what thou hast marr'd;
That will I make before I let thee go.

GLOUCESTER:
Wert thou not banished on pain of death?

QUEEN MARGARET:
I was; but I do find more pain in banishment
Than death can yield me here by my abode.
A husband and a son thou owest to me;
And thou a kingdom; all of you allegiance:
The sorrow that I have, by right is yours,
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

GLOUCESTER:
The curse my noble father laid on thee,
When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper
And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes,
And then, to dry them, gavest the duke a clout
Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland--
His curses, then from bitterness of soul
Denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee;
And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
So just is God, to right the innocent.

HASTINGS:
O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
And the most merciless that e'er was heard of!

RIVERS:
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.

DORSET:
No man but prophesied revenge for it.

BUCKINGHAM:
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven?
That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death,
Their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment,
Could all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
If not by war, by surfeit die your king,
As ours by murder, to make him a king!
Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales,
Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
Long mayst thou live to wail thy children's loss;
And see another, as I see thee now,
Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine!
Long die thy happy days before thy death;
And, after many lengthen'd hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen!
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Was stabb'd with bloody daggers: God, I pray him,
That none of you may live your natural age,
But by some unlook'd accident cut off!

GLOUCESTER:
Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd hag!

QUEEN MARGARET:
And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.
If heaven have any grievous plague in store
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace!
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity
The slave of nature and the son of hell!
Thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb!
Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins!
Thou rag of honour! thou detested--

GLOUCESTER:
Margaret.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Richard!

GLOUCESTER:
Ha!

QUEEN MARGARET:
I call thee not.

GLOUCESTER:
I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought
That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Why, so I did; but look'd for no reply.
O, let me make the period to my curse!

GLOUCESTER:
'Tis done by me, and ends in 'Margaret.'

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune!
Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.
The time will come when thou shalt wish for me
To help thee curse that poisonous bunchback'd toad.

HASTINGS:
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Foul shame upon you! you have all moved mine.

RIVERS:
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.

QUEEN MARGARET:
To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects:
O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!

DORSET:
Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Peace, master marquess, you are malapert:
Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.
O, that your young nobility could judge
What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable!
They that stand high have many blasts to shake them;
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.

GLOUCESTER:
Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.

DORSET:
It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.

GLOUCESTER:
Yea, and much more: but I was born so high,
Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top,
And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And turns the sun to shade; alas! alas!
Witness my son, now in the shade of death;
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest.
O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!
As it was won with blood, lost be it so!

BUCKINGHAM:
Have done! for shame, if not for charity.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Urge neither charity nor shame to me:
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd.
My charity is outrage, life my shame
And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage.

BUCKINGHAM:
Have done, have done.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O princely Buckingham I'll kiss thy hand,
In sign of league and amity with thee:
Now fair befal thee and thy noble house!
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.

BUCKINGHAM:
Nor no one here; for curses never pass
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.

QUEEN MARGARET:
I'll not believe but they ascend the sky,
And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
Look, when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death:
Have not to do with him, beware of him;
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.

GLOUCESTER:
What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM:
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel?
And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
O, but remember this another day,
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to God's!

HASTINGS:
My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.

RIVERS:
And so doth mine: I muse why she's at liberty.

GLOUCESTER:
I cannot blame her: by God's holy mother,
She hath had too much wrong; and I repent
My part thereof that I have done to her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I never did her any, to my knowledge.

GLOUCESTER:
But you have all the vantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to do somebody good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid,
He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains
God pardon them that are the cause of it!

RIVERS:
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.

GLOUCESTER:
So do I ever:
being well-advised.
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.

CATESBY:
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,
And for your grace; and you, my noble lords.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us?

RIVERS:
Madam, we will attend your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness,
I do beweep to many simple gulls
Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham;
And say it is the queen and her allies
That stir the king against the duke my brother.
Now, they believe it; and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey:
But then I sigh; and, with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:
And thus I clothe my naked villany
With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ;
And seem a saint, when most I play the devil.
But, soft! here come my executioners.
How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates!
Are you now going to dispatch this deed?

First Murderer:
We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant
That we may be admitted where he is.

GLOUCESTER:
Well thought upon; I have it here about me.
When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.

First Murderer:
Tush!
Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate;
Talkers are no good doers: be assured
We come to use our hands and not our tongues.

GLOUCESTER:
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears:
I like you, lads; about your business straight;
Go, go, dispatch.

First Murderer:
We will, my noble lord.

BRAKENBURY:
Why looks your grace so heavily today?

CLARENCE:
O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night,
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days,
So full of dismal terror was the time!

BRAKENBURY:
What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it.

CLARENCE:
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy;
And, in my company, my brother Gloucester;
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches: thence we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand fearful times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
That had befall'n us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in falling,
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown!
What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
What ugly sights of death within mine eyes!
Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks;
Ten thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea:
Some lay in dead men's skulls; and, in those holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
Which woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by.

BRAKENBURY:
Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?

CLARENCE:
Methought I had; and often did I strive
To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood
Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth
To seek the empty, vast and wandering air;
But smother'd it within my panting bulk,
Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.

BRAKENBURY:
Awaked you not with this sore agony?

CLARENCE:
O, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life;
O, then began the tempest to my soul,
Who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick;
Who cried aloud, 'What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?'
And so he vanish'd: then came wandering by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood; and he squeak'd out aloud,
'Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,
That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury;
Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!'
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very noise
I trembling waked, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made the dream.

BRAKENBURY:
No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you;
I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it.

CLARENCE:
O Brakenbury, I have done those things,
Which now bear evidence against my soul,
For Edward's sake; and see how he requites me!
O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone,
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me;
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.

BRAKENBURY:
I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest!
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night.
Princes have but their tides for their glories,
An outward honour for an inward toil;
And, for unfelt imagination,
They often feel a world of restless cares:
So that, betwixt their tides and low names,
There's nothing differs but the outward fame.

First Murderer:
Ho! who's here?

BRAKENBURY:
In God's name what are you, and how came you hither?

First Murderer:
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.

BRAKENBURY:
Yea, are you so brief?

Second Murderer:
O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show
him our commission; talk no more.

BRAKENBURY:
I am, in this, commanded to deliver
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands:
I will not reason what is meant hereby,
Because I will be guiltless of the meaning.
Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep:
I'll to the king; and signify to him
That thus I have resign'd my charge to you.

First Murderer:
Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well.

Second Murderer:
What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?

First Murderer:
No; then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.

Second Murderer:
When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till
the judgment-day.

First Murderer:
Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.

Second Murderer:
The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind
of remorse in me.

First Murderer:
What, art thou afraid?

Second Murderer:
Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be
damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.

First Murderer:
I thought thou hadst been resolute.

Second Murderer:
So I am, to let him live.

First Murderer:
Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.

Second Murderer:
I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour
will change; 'twas wont to hold me but while one
would tell twenty.

First Murderer:
How dost thou feel thyself now?

Second Murderer:
'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet
within me.

First Murderer:
Remember our reward, when the deed is done.

Second Murderer:
'Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.

First Murderer:
Where is thy conscience now?

Second Murderer:
In the Duke of Gloucester's purse.

First Murderer:
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward,
thy conscience flies out.

Second Murderer:
Let it go; there's few or none will entertain it.

First Murderer:
How if it come to thee again?

Second Murderer:
I'll not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it
makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it
accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it cheques him;
he cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it
detects him: 'tis a blushing shamefast spirit that
mutinies in a man's bosom; it fills one full of
obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold
that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it
is turned out of all towns and cities for a
dangerous thing; and every man that means to live
well endeavours to trust to himself and to live
without it.

First Murderer:
'Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me
not to kill the duke.

Second Murderer:
Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he
would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.

First Murderer:
Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me,
I warrant thee.

Second Murderer:
Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his
reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?

First Murderer:
Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy
sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt
in the next room.

Second Murderer:
O excellent devise! make a sop of him.

First Murderer:
Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?

Second Murderer:
No, first let's reason with him.

CLARENCE:
Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.

Second murderer:
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.

CLARENCE:
In God's name, what art thou?

Second Murderer:
A man, as you are.

CLARENCE:
But not, as I am, royal.

Second Murderer:
Nor you, as we are, loyal.

CLARENCE:
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.

Second Murderer:
My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.

CLARENCE:
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?

Both:
To, to, to--

CLARENCE:
To murder me?

Both:
Ay, ay.

CLARENCE:
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?

First Murderer:
Offended us you have not, but the king.

CLARENCE:
I shall be reconciled to him again.

Second Murderer:
Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.

CLARENCE:
Are you call'd forth from out a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
Where are the evidence that do accuse me?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence' death?
Before I be convict by course of law,
To threaten me with death is most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hope to have redemption
By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
That you depart and lay no hands on me
The deed you undertake is damnable.

First Murderer:
What we will do, we do upon command.

Second Murderer:
And he that hath commanded is the king.

CLARENCE:
Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings
Hath in the tables of his law commanded
That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then,
Spurn at his edict and fulfil a man's?
Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hands,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.

Second Murderer:
And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee,
For false forswearing and for murder too:
Thou didst receive the holy sacrament,
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.

First Murderer:
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade
Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.

Second Murderer:
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.

First Murderer:
How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us,
When thou hast broke it in so dear degree?

CLARENCE:
Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: Why, sirs,
He sends ye not to murder me for this
For in this sin he is as deep as I.
If God will be revenged for this deed.
O, know you yet, he doth it publicly,
Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm;
He needs no indirect nor lawless course
To cut off those that have offended him.

First Murderer:
Who made thee, then, a bloody minister,
When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?

CLARENCE:
My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.

First Murderer:
Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault,
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.

CLARENCE:
Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me;
I am his brother, and I love him well.
If you be hired for meed, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
Who shall reward you better for my life
Than Edward will for tidings of my death.

Second Murderer:
You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.

CLARENCE:
O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear:
Go you to him from me.

Both:
Ay, so we will.

CLARENCE:
Tell him, when that our princely father York
Bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm,
And charged us from his soul to love each other,
He little thought of this divided friendship:
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.

First Murderer:
Ay, millstones; as be lesson'd us to weep.

CLARENCE:
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.

First Murderer:
Right,
As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself:
'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.

CLARENCE:
It cannot be; for when I parted with him,
He hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs,
That he would labour my delivery.

Second Murderer:
Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee
From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.

First Murderer:
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.

CLARENCE:
Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul,
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind,
That thou wilt war with God by murdering me?
Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.

Second Murderer:
What shall we do?

CLARENCE:
Relent, and save your souls.

First Murderer:
Relent! 'tis cowardly and womanish.

CLARENCE:
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
Which of you, if you were a prince's son,
Being pent from liberty, as I am now,
if two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
Would not entreat for life?
My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
As you would beg, were you in my distress
A begging prince what beggar pities not?

Second Murderer:
Look behind you, my lord.

First Murderer:
Take that, and that: if all this will not do,
I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.

Second Murderer:
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd!
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous guilty murder done!

First Murderer:
How now! what mean'st thou, that thou help'st me not?
By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!

Second Murderer:
I would he knew that I had saved his brother!
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;
For I repent me that the duke is slain.

First Murderer:
So do not I: go, coward as thou art.
Now must I hide his body in some hole,
Until the duke take order for his burial:
And when I have my meed, I must away;
For this will out, and here I must not stay.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, so: now have I done a good day's work:
You peers, continue this united league:
I every day expect an embassage
From my Redeemer to redeem me hence;
And now in peace my soul shall part to heaven,
Since I have set my friends at peace on earth.
Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand;
Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.

RIVERS:
By heaven, my heart is purged from grudging hate:
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.

HASTINGS:
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!

KING EDWARD IV:
Take heed you dally not before your king;
Lest he that is the supreme King of kings
Confound your hidden falsehood, and award
Either of you to be the other's end.

HASTINGS:
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!

RIVERS:
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!

KING EDWARD IV:
Madam, yourself are not exempt in this,
Nor your son Dorset, Buckingham, nor you;
You have been factious one against the other,
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand;
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Here, Hastings; I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!

KING EDWARD IV:
Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love lord marquess.

DORSET:
This interchange of love, I here protest,
Upon my part shall be unviolable.

HASTINGS:
And so swear I, my lord

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
With thy embracements to my wife's allies,
And make me happy in your unity.

BUCKINGHAM:
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
On you or yours,
but with all duteous love
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love!
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assured that he is a friend
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he unto me! this do I beg of God,
When I am cold in zeal to yours.

KING EDWARD IV:
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here,
To make the perfect period of this peace.

BUCKINGHAM:
And, in good time, here comes the noble duke.

GLOUCESTER:
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen:
And, princely peers, a happy time of day!

KING EDWARD IV:
Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
Brother, we done deeds of charity;
Made peace enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.

GLOUCESTER:
A blessed labour, my most sovereign liege:
Amongst this princely heap, if any here,
By false intelligence, or wrong surmise,
Hold me a foe;
If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
By any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace:
'Tis death to me to be at enmity;
I hate it, and desire all good men's love.
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service;
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us;
Of you, Lord Rivers, and, Lord Grey, of you;
That without desert have frown'd on me;
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
More than the infant that is born to-night
I thank my God for my humility.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter:
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My sovereign liege, I do beseech your majesty
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, madam, have I offer'd love for this
To be so bouted in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the noble duke is dead?
You do him injury to scorn his corse.

RIVERS:
Who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
All seeing heaven, what a world is this!

BUCKINGHAM:
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?

DORSET:
Ay, my good lord; and no one in this presence
But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.

KING EDWARD IV:
Is Clarence dead? the order was reversed.

GLOUCESTER:
But he, poor soul, by your first order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
Some tardy cripple bore the countermand,
That came too lag to see him buried.
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blood,
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from suspicion!

DORSET:
A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!

KING EDWARD IV:
I pray thee, peace: my soul is full of sorrow.

DORSET:
I will not rise, unless your highness grant.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then speak at once what is it thou demand'st.

DORSET:
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life;
Who slew to-day a righteous gentleman
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.

KING EDWARD IV:
Have a tongue to doom my brother's death,
And shall the same give pardon to a slave?
My brother slew no man; his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was cruel death.
Who sued to me for him? who, in my rage,
Kneel'd at my feet, and bade me be advised
Who spake of brotherhood? who spake of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?
Who told me, in the field by Tewksbury
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said, 'Dear brother, live, and be a king'?
Who told me, when we both lay in the field
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
Even in his own garments, and gave himself,
All thin and naked, to the numb cold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully pluck'd, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters or your waiting-vassals
Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon;
And I unjustly too, must grant it you
But for my brother not a man would speak,
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
Have been beholding to him in his life;
Yet none of you would once plead for his life.
O God, I fear thy justice will take hold
On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this!
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.
Oh, poor Clarence!

GLOUCESTER:
This is the fruit of rashness! Mark'd you not
How that the guilty kindred of the queen
Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death?
O, they did urge it still unto the king!
God will revenge it. But come, let us in,
To comfort Edward with our company.

BUCKINGHAM:
We wait upon your grace.

Boy:
Tell me, good grandam, is our father dead?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
No, boy.

Boy:
Why do you wring your hands, and beat your breast,
And cry 'O Clarence, my unhappy son!'

Girl:
Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
And call us wretches, orphans, castaways
If that our noble father be alive?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
My pretty cousins, you mistake me much;
I do lament the sickness of the king.
As loath to lose him, not your father's death;
It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.

Boy:
Then, grandam, you conclude that he is dead.
The king my uncle is to blame for this:
God will revenge it; whom I will importune
With daily prayers all to that effect.

Girl:
And so will I.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Peace, children, peace! the king doth love you well:
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your father's death.

Boy:
Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester
Told me, the king, provoked by the queen,
Devised impeachments to imprison him :
And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
And hugg'd me in his arm, and kindly kiss'd my cheek;
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And he would love me dearly as his child.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes,
And with a virtuous vizard hide foul guile!
He is my son; yea, and therein my shame;
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.

Boy:
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Ay, boy.

Boy:
I cannot think it. Hark! what noise is this?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
I'll join with black despair against my soul,
And to myself become an enemy.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What means this scene of rude impatience?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To make an act of tragic violence:
Edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead.
Why grow the branches now the root is wither'd?
Why wither not the leaves the sap being gone?
If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
That our swift-winged souls may catch the king's;
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him
To his new kingdom of perpetual rest.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
As I had title in thy noble husband!
I have bewept a worthy husband's death,
And lived by looking on his images:
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death,
And I for comfort have but one false glass,
Which grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow; yet thou art a mother,
And hast the comfort of thy children left thee:
But death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms,
And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble limbs,
Edward and Clarence. O, what cause have I,
Thine being but a moiety of my grief,
To overgo thy plaints and drown thy cries!

Boy:
Good aunt, you wept not for our father's death;
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?

Girl:
Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd;
Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Give me no help in lamentation;
I am not barren to bring forth complaints
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I, being govern'd by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!
Oh for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!

Children:
Oh for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What stay had I but Edward? and he's gone.

Children:
What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What stays had I but they? and they are gone.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Was never widow had so dear a loss!

Children:
Were never orphans had so dear a loss!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Was never mother had so dear a loss!
Alas, I am the mother of these moans!
Their woes are parcell'd, mine are general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;
I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she:
These babes for Clarence weep and so do I;
I for an Edward weep, so do not they:
Alas, you three, on me, threefold distress'd,
Pour all your tears! I am your sorrow's nurse,
And I will pamper it with lamentations.

DORSET:
Comfort, dear mother: God is much displeased
That you take with unthankfulness, his doing:
In common worldly things, 'tis call'd ungrateful,
With dull unwilligness to repay a debt
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.

RIVERS:
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son: send straight for him
Let him be crown'd; in him your comfort lives:
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave,
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne.

GLOUCESTER:
Madam, have comfort: all of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining star;
But none can cure their harms by wailing them.
Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;
I did not see your grace: humbly on my knee
I crave your blessing.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
God bless thee; and put meekness in thy mind,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!

GLOUCESTER:

BUCKINGHAM:
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers,
That bear this mutual heavy load of moan,
Now cheer each other in each other's love
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
The broken rancour of your high-swoln hearts,
But lately splinter'd, knit, and join'd together,
Must gently be preserved, cherish'd, and kept:
Me seemeth good, that, with some little train,
Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fetch'd
Hither to London, to be crown'd our king.

RIVERS:
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?

BUCKINGHAM:
Marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude,
The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous
By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd:
Where every horse bears his commanding rein,
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.

GLOUCESTER:
I hope the king made peace with all of us
And the compact is firm and true in me.

RIVERS:
And so in me; and so, I think, in all:
Yet, since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged:
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.

HASTINGS:
And so say I.

GLOUCESTER:
Then be it so; and go we to determine
Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.
Madam, and you, my mother, will you go
To give your censures in this weighty business?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
With all our harts.

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
For God's sake, let not us two be behind;
For, by the way, I'll sort occasion,
As index to the story we late talk'd of,
To part the queen's proud kindred from the king.

GLOUCESTER:
My other self, my counsel's consistory,
My oracle, my prophet! My dear cousin,
I, like a child, will go by thy direction.
Towards Ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.

First Citizen:
Neighbour, well met: whither away so fast?

Second Citizen:
I promise you, I scarcely know myself:
Hear you the news abroad?

First Citizen:
Ay, that the king is dead.

Second Citizen:
Bad news, by'r lady; seldom comes the better:
I fear, I fear 'twill prove a troublous world.

Third Citizen:
Neighbours, God speed!

First Citizen:
Give you good morrow, sir.

Third Citizen:
Doth this news hold of good King Edward's death?

Second Citizen:
Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!

Third Citizen:
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.

First Citizen:
No, no; by God's good grace his son shall reign.

Third Citizen:
Woe to the land that's govern'd by a child!

Second Citizen:
In him there is a hope of government,
That in his nonage council under him,
And in his full and ripen'd years himself,
No doubt, shall then and till then govern well.

First Citizen:
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old.

Third Citizen:
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot;
For then this land was famously enrich'd
With politic grave counsel; then the king
Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.

First Citizen:
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.

Third Citizen:
Better it were they all came by the father,
Or by the father there were none at all;
For emulation now, who shall be nearest,
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester!
And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud:
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly land might solace as before.

First Citizen:
Come, come, we fear the worst; all shall be well.

Third Citizen:
When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks;
When great leaves fall, the winter is at hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.
All may be well; but, if God sort it so,
'Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.

Second Citizen:
Truly, the souls of men are full of dread:
Ye cannot reason almost with a man
That looks not heavily and full of fear.

Third Citizen:
Before the times of change, still is it so:
By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust
Ensuing dangers; as by proof, we see
The waters swell before a boisterous storm.
But leave it all to God. whither away?

Second Citizen:
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.

Third Citizen:
And so was I: I'll bear you company.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton;
At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night:
To-morrow, or next day, they will be here.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I long with all my heart to see the prince:
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But I hear, no; they say my son of York
Hath almost overta'en him in his growth.

YORK:
Ay, mother; but I would not have it so.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, my young cousin, it is good to grow.

YORK:
Grandam, one night, as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow
More than my brother: 'Ay,' quoth my uncle
Gloucester,
'Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace:'
And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast,
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee;
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely,
That, if this rule were true, he should be gracious.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I hope he is; but yet let mothers doubt.

YORK:
Now, by my troth, if I had been remember'd,
I could have given my uncle's grace a flout,
To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
How, my pretty York? I pray thee, let me hear it.

YORK:
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old
'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this?

YORK:
Grandam, his nurse.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
His nurse! why, she was dead ere thou wert born.

YORK:
If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
A parlous boy: go to, you are too shrewd.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Good madam, be not angry with the child.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Pitchers have ears.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
Here comes a messenger. What news?

Messenger:
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to unfold.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
How fares the prince?

Messenger:
Well, madam, and in health.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is thy news then?

Messenger:
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,
With them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Who hath committed them?

Messenger:
The mighty dukes
Gloucester and Buckingham.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
For what offence?

Messenger:
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed;
Why or for what these nobles were committed
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ay me, I see the downfall of our house!
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind;
Insulting tyranny begins to jet
Upon the innocent and aweless throne:
Welcome, destruction, death, and massacre!
I see, as in a map, the end of all.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld!
My husband lost his life to get the crown;
And often up and down my sons were toss'd,
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss:
And being seated, and domestic broils
Clean over-blown, themselves, the conquerors.
Make war upon themselves; blood against blood,
Self against self: O, preposterous
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen;
Or let me die, to look on death no more!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Come, come, my boy; we will to sanctuary.
Madam, farewell.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I'll go along with you.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
You have no cause.

ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:
My gracious lady, go;
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
For my part, I'll resign unto your grace
The seal I keep: and so betide to me
As well I tender you and all of yours!
Come, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.

BUCKINGHAM:
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.

GLOUCESTER:
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign
The weary way hath made you melancholy.

PRINCE EDWARD:
No, uncle; but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy
I want more uncles here to welcome me.

GLOUCESTER:
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the world's deceit
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Than of his outward show; which, God he knows,
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Those uncles which you want were dangerous;
Your grace attended to their sugar'd words,
But look'd not on the poison of their hearts :
God keep you from them, and from such false friends!

PRINCE EDWARD:
God keep me from false friends! but they were none.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.

Lord Mayor:
God bless your grace with health and happy days!

PRINCE EDWARD:
I thank you, good my lord; and thank you all.
I thought my mother, and my brother York,
Would long ere this have met us on the way
Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come or no!

BUCKINGHAM:
And, in good time, here comes the sweating lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Welcome, my lord: what, will our mother come?

HASTINGS:
On what occasion, God he knows, not I,
The queen your mother, and your brother York,
Have taken sanctuary: the tender prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.

BUCKINGHAM:
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers! Lord cardinal, will your grace
Persuade the queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his princely brother presently?
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.

CARDINAL:
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessed sanctuary! not for all this land
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.

BUCKINGHAM:
You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord,
Too ceremonious and traditional
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those whose dealings have deserved the place,
And those who have the wit to claim the place:
This prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserved it;
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it:
Then, taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there.
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men;
But sanctuary children ne'er till now.

CARDINAL:
My lord, you shall o'er-rule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?

HASTINGS:
I go, my lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?

GLOUCESTER:
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your highness shall repose you at the Tower:
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I do not like the Tower, of any place.
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?

BUCKINGHAM:
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place;
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?

BUCKINGHAM:
Upon record, my gracious lord.

PRINCE EDWARD:
But say, my lord, it were not register'd,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As 'twere retail'd to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.

GLOUCESTER:

PRINCE EDWARD:
What say you, uncle?

GLOUCESTER:
I say, without characters, fame lives long.
Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,
I moralize two meanings in one word.

PRINCE EDWARD:
That Julius Caesar was a famous man;
With what his valour did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valour live
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,--

BUCKINGHAM:
What, my gracious lord?

PRINCE EDWARD:
An if I live until I be a man,
I'll win our ancient right in France again,
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.

GLOUCESTER:

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of York.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Richard of York! how fares our loving brother?

YORK:
Well, my dread lord; so must I call you now.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours:
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.

GLOUCESTER:
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?

YORK:
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth
The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.

GLOUCESTER:
He hath, my lord.

YORK:
And therefore is he idle?

GLOUCESTER:
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.

YORK:
Then is he more beholding to you than I.

GLOUCESTER:
He may command me as my sovereign;
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.

YORK:
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.

GLOUCESTER:
My dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.

PRINCE EDWARD:
A beggar, brother?

YORK:
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give;
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.

GLOUCESTER:
A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin.

YORK:
A greater gift! O, that's the sword to it.

GLOUCESTER:
A gentle cousin, were it light enough.

YORK:
O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts;
In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.

GLOUCESTER:
It is too heavy for your grace to wear.

YORK:
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.

GLOUCESTER:
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?

YORK:
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.

GLOUCESTER:
How?

YORK:
Little.

PRINCE EDWARD:
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk:
Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.

YORK:
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me:
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me;
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.

BUCKINGHAM:
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
So cunning and so young is wonderful.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, will't please you pass along?
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.

YORK:
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?

PRINCE EDWARD:
My lord protector needs will have it so.

YORK:
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, what should you fear?

YORK:
Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost:
My grandam told me he was murdered there.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I fear no uncles dead.

GLOUCESTER:
Nor none that live, I hope.

PRINCE EDWARD:
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come, my lord; and with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.

BUCKINGHAM:
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtle mother
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?

GLOUCESTER:
No doubt, no doubt; O, 'tis a parlous boy;
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable
He is all the mother's, from the top to toe.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
As closely to conceal what we impart:
Thou know'st our reasons urged upon the way;
What think'st thou? is it not an easy matter
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind,
For the instalment of this noble duke
In the seat royal of this famous isle?

CATESBY:
He for his father's sake so loves the prince,
That he will not be won to aught against him.

BUCKINGHAM:
What think'st thou, then, of Stanley? what will he?

CATESBY:
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,
And, as it were far off sound thou Lord Hastings,
How doth he stand affected to our purpose;
And summon him to-morrow to the Tower,
To sit about the coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to us,
Encourage him, and show him all our reasons:
If he be leaden, icy-cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too; and so break off your talk,
And give us notice of his inclination:
For we to-morrow hold divided councils,
Wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Commend me to Lord William: tell him, Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret-castle;
And bid my friend, for joy of this good news,
Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.

BUCKINGHAM:
Good Catesby, go, effect this business soundly.

CATESBY:
My good lords both, with all the heed I may.

GLOUCESTER:
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?

CATESBY:
You shall, my lord.

GLOUCESTER:
At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?

GLOUCESTER:
Chop off his head, man; somewhat we will do:
And, look, when I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Hereford, and the moveables
Whereof the king my brother stood possess'd.

BUCKINGHAM:
I'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.

GLOUCESTER:
And look to have it yielded with all willingness.
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
We may digest our complots in some form.

Messenger:
What, ho! my lord!

HASTINGS:

Messenger:
A messenger from the Lord Stanley.

HASTINGS:
What is't o'clock?

Messenger:
Upon the stroke of four.

HASTINGS:
Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights?

Messenger:
So it should seem by that I have to say.
First, he commends him to your noble lordship.

HASTINGS:
And then?

Messenger:
And then he sends you word
He dreamt to-night the boar had razed his helm:
Besides, he says there are two councils held;
And that may be determined at the one
which may make you and him to rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure,
If presently you will take horse with him,
And with all speed post with him toward the north,
To shun the danger that his soul divines.

HASTINGS:
Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord;
Bid him not fear the separated councils
His honour and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my servant Catesby
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, wanting instance:
And for his dreams, I wonder he is so fond
To trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers
To fly the boar before the boar pursues,
Were to incense the boar to follow us
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.

Messenger:
My gracious lord, I'll tell him what you say.

CATESBY:
Many good morrows to my noble lord!

HASTINGS:
Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring
What news, what news, in this our tottering state?

CATESBY:
It is a reeling world, indeed, my lord;
And I believe twill never stand upright
Tim Richard wear the garland of the realm.

HASTINGS:
How! wear the garland! dost thou mean the crown?

CATESBY:
Ay, my good lord.

HASTINGS:
I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders
Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?

CATESBY:
Ay, on my life; and hopes to find forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof:
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.

HASTINGS:
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still mine enemies:
But, that I'll give my voice on Richard's side,
To bar my master's heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death.

CATESBY:
God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!

HASTINGS:
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,
That they who brought me in my master's hate
I live to look upon their tragedy.
I tell thee, Catesby--

CATESBY:
What, my lord?

HASTINGS:
Ere a fortnight make me elder,
I'll send some packing that yet think not on it.

CATESBY:
'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,
When men are unprepared and look not for it.

HASTINGS:
O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: and so 'twill do
With some men else, who think themselves as safe
As thou and I; who, as thou know'st, are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.

CATESBY:
The princes both make high account of you;
For they account his head upon the bridge.

HASTINGS:
I know they do; and I have well deserved it.
Come on, come on; where is your boar-spear, man?
Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?

STANLEY:
My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby:
You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
I do not like these several councils, I.

HASTINGS:
My lord,
I hold my life as dear as you do yours;
And never in my life, I do protest,
Was it more precious to me than 'tis now:
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?

STANLEY:
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,
Were jocund, and supposed their state was sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
But yet, you see how soon the day o'ercast.
This sudden stag of rancour I misdoubt:
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.

HASTINGS:
Come, come, have with you. Wot you what, my lord?
To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded.

LORD STANLEY:
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Than some that have accused them wear their hats.
But come, my lord, let us away.

HASTINGS:
Go on before; I'll talk with this good fellow.
How now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?

Pursuivant:
The better that your lordship please to ask.

HASTINGS:
I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now
Than when I met thee last where now we meet:
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower,
By the suggestion of the queen's allies;
But now, I tell thee--keep it to thyself--
This day those enemies are put to death,
And I in better state than e'er I was.

Pursuivant:
God hold it, to your honour's good content!

HASTINGS:
Gramercy, fellow: there, drink that for me.

Pursuivant:
God save your lordship!

Priest:
Well met, my lord; I am glad to see your honour.

HASTINGS:
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt for your last exercise;
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.

BUCKINGHAM:
What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest;
Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.

HASTINGS:
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
Those men you talk of came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?

BUCKINGHAM:
I do, my lord; but long I shall not stay
I shall return before your lordship thence.

HASTINGS:
'Tis like enough, for I stay dinner there.

BUCKINGHAM:

HASTINGS:
I'll wait upon your lordship.

RATCLIFF:
Come, bring forth the prisoners.

RIVERS:
Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
To-day shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.

GREY:
God keep the prince from all the pack of you!
A knot you are of damned blood-suckers!

VAUGHAN:
You live that shall cry woe for this after.

RATCLIFF:
Dispatch; the limit of your lives is out.

RIVERS:
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
Richard the second here was hack'd to death;
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.

GREY:
Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads,
For standing by when Richard stabb'd her son.

RIVERS:
Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Richard. O, remember, God
To hear her prayers for them, as now for us
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.

RATCLIFF:
Make haste; the hour of death is expiate.

RIVERS:
Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace:
And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.

HASTINGS:
My lords, at once: the cause why we are met
Is, to determine of the coronation.
In God's name, speak: when is the royal day?

BUCKINGHAM:
Are all things fitting for that royal time?

DERBY:
It is, and wants but nomination.

BISHOP OF ELY:
To-morrow, then, I judge a happy day.

BUCKINGHAM:
Who knows the lord protector's mind herein?
Who is most inward with the royal duke?

BISHOP OF ELY:
Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.

BUCKINGHAM:
Who, I, my lord I we know each other's faces,
But for our hearts, he knows no more of mine,
Than I of yours;
Nor I no more of his, than you of mine.
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.

HASTINGS:
I thank his grace, I know he loves me well;
But, for his purpose in the coronation.
I have not sounded him, nor he deliver'd
His gracious pleasure any way therein:
But you, my noble lords, may name the time;
And in the duke's behalf I'll give my voice,
Which, I presume, he'll take in gentle part.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Now in good time, here comes the duke himself.

GLOUCESTER:
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
I have been long a sleeper; but, I hope,
My absence doth neglect no great designs,
Which by my presence might have been concluded.

BUCKINGHAM:
Had not you come upon your cue, my lord
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,--
I mean, your voice,--for crowning of the king.

GLOUCESTER:
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder;
His lordship knows me well, and loves me well.

HASTINGS:
I thank your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord of Ely!

BISHOP OF ELY:
My lord?

GLOUCESTER:
When I was last in Holborn,
I saw good strawberries in your garden there
I do beseech you send for some of them.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart.

GLOUCESTER:
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testy gentleman so hot,
As he will lose his head ere give consent
His master's son, as worshipful as he terms it,
Shall lose the royalty of England's throne.

BUCKINGHAM:
Withdraw you hence, my lord, I'll follow you.

DERBY:
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
To-morrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden;
For I myself am not so well provided
As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.

BISHOP OF ELY:
Where is my lord protector? I have sent for these
strawberries.

HASTINGS:
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth to-day;
There's some conceit or other likes him well,
When he doth bid good morrow with such a spirit.
I think there's never a man in Christendom
That can less hide his love or hate than he;
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.

DERBY:
What of his heart perceive you in his face
By any likelihood he show'd to-day?

HASTINGS:
Marry, that with no man here he is offended;
For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.

DERBY:
I pray God he be not, I say.

GLOUCESTER:
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve
That do conspire my death with devilish plots
Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevail'd
Upon my body with their hellish charms?

HASTINGS:
The tender love I bear your grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this noble presence
To doom the offenders, whatsoever they be
I say, my lord, they have deserved death.

GLOUCESTER:
Then be your eyes the witness of this ill:
See how I am bewitch'd; behold mine arm
Is, like a blasted sapling, wither'd up:
And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot strumpet Shore,
That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.

HASTINGS:
If they have done this thing, my gracious lord--

GLOUCESTER:
If I thou protector of this damned strumpet--
Tellest thou me of 'ifs'?  Thou art a traitor:
Off with his head! Now, by Saint Paul I swear,
I will not dine until I see the same.
Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done:
The rest, that love me, rise and follow me.

HASTINGS:
Woe, woe for England! not a whit for me;
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm;
But I disdain'd it, and did scorn to fly:
Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And startled, when he look'd upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
O, now I want the priest that spake to me:
I now repent I told the pursuivant
As 'twere triumphing at mine enemies,
How they at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd,
And I myself secure in grace and favour.
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head!

RATCLIFF:
Dispatch, my lord; the duke would be at dinner:
Make a short shrift; he longs to see your head.

HASTINGS:
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks,
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready, with every nod, to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.

LOVEL:
Come, come, dispatch; 'tis bootless to exclaim.

HASTINGS:
O bloody Richard! miserable England!
I prophesy the fearful'st time to thee
That ever wretched age hath look'd upon.
Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head.
They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour,
Murder thy breath in the middle of a word,
And then begin again, and stop again,
As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?

BUCKINGHAM:
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian;
Speak and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
Intending deep suspicion: ghastly looks
Are at my service, like enforced smiles;
And both are ready in their offices,
At any time, to grace my stratagems.
But what, is Catesby gone?

GLOUCESTER:
He is; and, see, he brings the mayor along.

BUCKINGHAM:
Lord mayor,--

GLOUCESTER:
Look to the drawbridge there!

BUCKINGHAM:
Hark! a drum.

GLOUCESTER:
Catesby, o'erlook the walls.

BUCKINGHAM:
Lord mayor, the reason we have sent--

GLOUCESTER:
Look back, defend thee, here are enemies.

BUCKINGHAM:
God and our innocency defend and guard us!

GLOUCESTER:
Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel.

LOVEL:
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

GLOUCESTER:
So dear I loved the man, that I must weep.
I took him for the plainest harmless creature
That breathed upon this earth a Christian;
Made him my book wherein my soul recorded
The history of all her secret thoughts:
So smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue,
That, his apparent open guilt omitted,
I mean, his conversation with Shore's wife,
He lived from all attainder of suspect.

BUCKINGHAM:
Well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor
That ever lived.
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were't not that, by great preservation,
We live to tell it you, the subtle traitor
This day had plotted, in the council-house
To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?

Lord Mayor:
What, had he so?

GLOUCESTER:
What, think You we are Turks or infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly to the villain's death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England and our persons' safety,
Enforced us to this execution?

Lord Mayor:
Now, fair befall you! he deserved his death;
And you my good lords, both have well proceeded,
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
I never look'd for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

GLOUCESTER:
Yet had not we determined he should die,
Until your lordship came to see his death;
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Somewhat against our meaning, have prevented:
Because, my lord, we would have had you heard
The traitor speak, and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treason;
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the citizens, who haply may
Misconstrue us in him and wail his death.

Lord Mayor:
But, my good lord, your grace's word shall serve,
As well as I had seen and heard him speak
And doubt you not, right noble princes both,
But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens
With all your just proceedings in this cause.

GLOUCESTER:
And to that end we wish'd your lord-ship here,
To avoid the carping censures of the world.

BUCKINGHAM:
But since you come too late of our intents,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend:
And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.
The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post:
There, at your meet'st advantage of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edward's children:
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen,
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the crown; meaning indeed his house,
Which, by the sign thereof was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
And bestial appetite in change of lust;
Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,
Even where his lustful eye or savage heart,
Without control, listed to make his prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Tell them, when that my mother went with child
Of that unsatiate Edward, noble York
My princely father then had wars in France
And, by just computation of the time,
Found that the issue was not his begot;
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble duke my father:
But touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off,
Because you know, my lord, my mother lives.

BUCKINGHAM:
Fear not, my lord, I'll play the orator
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu.

GLOUCESTER:
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle;
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.

BUCKINGHAM:
I go: and towards three or four o'clock
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.

GLOUCESTER:
Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw;
Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both
Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle.
Now will I in, to take some privy order,
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight;
And to give notice, that no manner of person
At any time have recourse unto the princes.

Scrivener:
This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings;
Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd,
That it may be this day read over in Paul's.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it brought me;
The precedent was full as long a-doing:
And yet within these five hours lived Lord Hastings,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty
Here's a good world the while! Why who's so gross,
That seeth not this palpable device?
Yet who's so blind, but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world; and all will come to nought,
When such bad dealings must be seen in thought.

GLOUCESTER:
How now, my lord, what say the citizens?

BUCKINGHAM:
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,
The citizens are mum and speak not a word.

GLOUCESTER:
Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's children?

BUCKINGHAM:
I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy,
And his contract by deputy in France;
The insatiate greediness of his desires,
And his enforcement of the city wives;
His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France,
His resemblance, being not like the duke;
Withal I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
Your dicipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility:
Indeed, left nothing fitting for the purpose
Untouch'd, or slightly handled, in discourse
And when mine oratory grew to an end
I bid them that did love their country's good
Cry 'God save Richard, England's royal king!'

GLOUCESTER:
Ah! and did they so?

BUCKINGHAM:
No, so God help me, they spake not a word;
But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,
Gazed each on other, and look'd deadly pale.
Which when I saw, I reprehended them;
And ask'd the mayor what meant this wilful silence:
His answer was, the people were not wont
To be spoke to but by the recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my tale again,
'Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd;'
But nothing spake in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At the lower end of the hall, hurl'd up their caps,
And some ten voices cried 'God save King Richard!'
And thus I took the vantage of those few,
'Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,' quoth I;
'This general applause and loving shout
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard:'
And even here brake off, and came away.

GLOUCESTER:
What tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak?

BUCKINGHAM:
No, by my troth, my lord.

GLOUCESTER:
Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?

BUCKINGHAM:
The mayor is here at hand: intend some fear;
Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit:
And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
And stand betwixt two churchmen, good my lord;
For on that ground I'll build a holy descant:
And be not easily won to our request:
Play the maid's part, still answer nay, and take it.

GLOUCESTER:
I go; and if you plead as well for them
As I can say nay to thee for myself,
No doubt well bring it to a happy issue.

BUCKINGHAM:
Go, go, up to the leads; the lord mayor knocks.
Welcome my lord; I dance attendance here;
I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
Here comes his servant: how now, Catesby,
What says he?

CATESBY:
My lord: he doth entreat your grace;
To visit him to-morrow or next day:
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation;
And no worldly suit would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy exercise.

BUCKINGHAM:
Return, good Catesby, to thy lord again;
Tell him, myself, the mayor and citizens,
In deep designs and matters of great moment,
No less importing than our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his grace.

CATESBY:
I'll tell him what you say, my lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
He is not lolling on a lewd day-bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dallying with a brace of courtezans,
But meditating with two deep divines;
Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul:
Happy were England, would this gracious prince
Take on himself the sovereignty thereof:
But, sure, I fear, we shall ne'er win him to it.

Lord Mayor:
Marry, God forbid his grace should say us nay!

BUCKINGHAM:
I fear he will.
How now, Catesby, what says your lord?

CATESBY:
My lord,
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to speak with him,
His grace not being warn'd thereof before:
My lord, he fears you mean no good to him.

BUCKINGHAM:
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him:
By heaven, I come in perfect love to him;
And so once more return and tell his grace.
When holy and devout religious men
Are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.

Lord Mayor:
See, where he stands between two clergymen!

BUCKINGHAM:
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
To stay him from the fall of vanity:
And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
True ornaments to know a holy man.
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
Lend favourable ears to our request;
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.

GLOUCESTER:
My lord, there needs no such apology:
I rather do beseech you pardon me,
Who, earnest in the service of my God,
Neglect the visitation of my friends.
But, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?

BUCKINGHAM:
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above,
And all good men of this ungovern'd isle.

GLOUCESTER:
I do suspect I have done some offence
That seems disgracious in the city's eyes,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.

BUCKINGHAM:
You have, my lord: would it might please your grace,
At our entreaties, to amend that fault!

GLOUCESTER:
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?

BUCKINGHAM:
Then know, it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
The scepter'd office of your ancestors,
Your state of fortune and your due of birth,
The lineal glory of your royal house,
To the corruption of a blemished stock:
Whilst, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our country's good,
This noble isle doth want her proper limbs;
Her face defaced with scars of infamy,
Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And almost shoulder'd in the swallowing gulf
Of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion.
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land,
Not as protector, steward, substitute,
Or lowly factor for another's gain;
But as successively from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own.
For this, consorted with the citizens,
Your very worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just suit come I to move your grace.

GLOUCESTER:
I know not whether to depart in silence,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof.
Best fitteth my degree or your condition
If not to answer, you might haply think
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me;
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So season'd with your faithful love to me.
Then, on the other side, I cheque'd my friends.
Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitively thus I answer you.
Your love deserves my thanks; but my desert
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
First if all obstacles were cut away,
And that my path were even to the crown,
As my ripe revenue and due by birth
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
As I had rather hide me from my greatness,
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,
Than in my greatness covet to be hid,
And in the vapour of my glory smother'd.
But, God be thank'd, there's no need of me,
And much I need to help you, if need were;
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,
Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
On him I lay what you would lay on me,
The right and fortune of his happy stars;
Which God defend that I should wring from him!

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, this argues conscience in your grace;
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumstances well considered.
You say that Edward is your brother's son:
So say we too, but not by Edward's wife;
For first he was contract to Lady Lucy--
Your mother lives a witness to that vow--
And afterward by substitute betroth'd
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
These both put by a poor petitioner,
A care-crazed mother of a many children,
A beauty-waning and distressed widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his lustful eye,
Seduced the pitch and height of all his thoughts
To base declension and loathed bigamy
By her, in his unlawful bed, he got
This Edward, whom our manners term the prince.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that, for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my tongue.
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
This proffer'd benefit of dignity;
If non to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times,
Unto a lineal true-derived course.

Lord Mayor:
Do, good my lord, your citizens entreat you.

BUCKINGHAM:
Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love.

CATESBY:
O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!

GLOUCESTER:
Alas, why would you heap these cares on me?
I am unfit for state and majesty;
I do beseech you, take it not amiss;
I cannot nor I will not yield to you.

BUCKINGHAM:
If you refuse it,--as, in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the child, Your brother's son;
As well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your kin,
And egally indeed to all estates,--
Yet whether you accept our suit or no,
Your brother's son shall never reign our king;
But we will plant some other in the throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house:
And in this resolution here we leave you.--
Come, citizens: 'zounds! I'll entreat no more.

GLOUCESTER:
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham.

CATESBY:
Call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.

ANOTHER:
Do, good my lord, lest all the land do rue it.

GLOUCESTER:
Would you enforce me to a world of care?
Well, call them again. I am not made of stone,
But penetrable to your. kind entreats,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Cousin of Buckingham, and you sage, grave men,
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To bear her burthen, whether I will or no,
I must have patience to endure the load:
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof;
For God he knows, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire thereof.

Lord Mayor:
God bless your grace! we see it, and will say it.

GLOUCESTER:
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.

BUCKINGHAM:
Then I salute you with this kingly title:
Long live Richard, England's royal king!

Lord Mayor:
Amen.

BUCKINGHAM:
To-morrow will it please you to be crown'd?

GLOUCESTER:
Even when you please, since you will have it so.

BUCKINGHAM:
To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace:
And so most joyfully we take our leave.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, let us to our holy task again.
Farewell, good cousin; farewell, gentle friends.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Who meets us here?  my niece Plantagenet
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my life, she's wandering to the Tower,
On pure heart's love to greet the tender princes.
Daughter, well met.

LADY ANNE:
God give your graces both
A happy and a joyful time of day!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
As much to you, good sister! Whither away?

LADY ANNE:
No farther than the Tower; and, as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
To gratulate the gentle princes there.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Kind sister, thanks: we'll enter all together.
And, in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
Master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the prince, and my young son of York?

BRAKENBURY:
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them;
The king hath straitly charged the contrary.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The king! why, who's that?

BRAKENBURY:
I cry you mercy: I mean the lord protector.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me?
I am their mother; who should keep me from them?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I am their fathers mother; I will see them.

LADY ANNE:
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother:
Then bring me to their sights; I'll bear thy blame
And take thy office from thee, on my peril.

BRAKENBURY:
No, madam, no; I may not leave it so:
I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.

LORD STANLEY:
Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,
And I'll salute your grace of York as mother,
And reverend looker on, of two fair queens.
Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,
There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart
May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon
With this dead-killing news!

LADY ANNE:
Despiteful tidings! O unpleasing news!

DORSET:
Be of good cheer: mother, how fares your grace?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee hence!
Death and destruction dog thee at the heels;
Thy mother's name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead;
And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen.

LORD STANLEY:
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
Take all the swift advantage of the hours;
You shall have letters from me to my son
To meet you on the way, and welcome you.
Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world,
Whose unavoided eye is murderous.

LORD STANLEY:
Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.

LADY ANNE:
And I in all unwillingness will go.
I would to God that the inclusive verge
Of golden metal that must round my brow
Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brain!
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die, ere men can say, God save the queen!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory
To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.

LADY ANNE:
No! why?  When he that is my husband now
Came to me, as I follow'd Henry's corse,
When scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands
Which issued from my other angel husband
And that dead saint which then I weeping follow'd;
O, when, I say, I look'd on Richard's face,
This was my wish: 'Be thou,' quoth I, ' accursed,
For making me, so young, so old a widow!
And, when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed;
And be thy wife--if any be so mad--
As miserable by the life of thee
As thou hast made me by my dear lord's death!
Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,
Even in so short a space, my woman's heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words
And proved the subject of my own soul's curse,
Which ever since hath kept my eyes from rest;
For never yet one hour in his bed
Have I enjoy'd the golden dew of sleep,
But have been waked by his timorous dreams.
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick;
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.

LADY ANNE:
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!

LADY ANNE:
Adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!

DUCHESS OF YORK:

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immured within your walls!
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones!
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes, use my babies well!
So foolish sorrow bids your stones farewell.

KING RICHARD III:
Stand all apart Cousin of Buckingham!

BUCKINGHAM:
My gracious sovereign?

KING RICHARD III:
Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy advice
And thy assistance, is King Richard seated;
But shall we wear these honours for a day?
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?

BUCKINGHAM:
Still live they and for ever may they last!

KING RICHARD III:
O Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed
Young Edward lives: think now what I would say.

BUCKINGHAM:
Say on, my loving lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, Buckingham, I say, I would be king,

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.

KING RICHARD III:
Ha! am I king? 'tis so: but Edward lives.

BUCKINGHAM:
True, noble prince.

KING RICHARD III:
O bitter consequence,
That Edward still should live! 'True, noble prince!'
Cousin, thou wert not wont to be so dull:
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead;
And I would have it suddenly perform'd.
What sayest thou? speak suddenly; be brief.

BUCKINGHAM:
Your grace may do your pleasure.

KING RICHARD III:
Tut, tut, thou art all ice, thy kindness freezeth:
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?

BUCKINGHAM:
Give me some breath, some little pause, my lord
Before I positively herein:
I will resolve your grace immediately.

CATESBY:

KING RICHARD III:
I will converse with iron-witted fools
And unrespective boys: none are for me
That look into me with considerate eyes:
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Boy!

Page:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold
Would tempt unto a close exploit of death?

Page:
My lord, I know a discontented gentleman,
Whose humble means match not his haughty mind:
Gold were as good as twenty orators,
And will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing.

KING RICHARD III:
What is his name?

Page:
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.

KING RICHARD III:
I partly know the man: go, call him hither.
The deep-revolving witty Buckingham
No more shall be the neighbour to my counsel:
Hath he so long held out with me untired,
And stops he now for breath?
How now! what news with you?

STANLEY:
My lord, I hear the Marquis Dorset's fled
To Richmond, in those parts beyond the sea
Where he abides.

KING RICHARD III:
Catesby!

CATESBY:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Rumour it abroad
That Anne, my wife, is sick and like to die:
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean-born gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter:
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look, how thou dream'st! I say again, give out
That Anne my wife is sick and like to die:
About it; for it stands me much upon,
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
I must be married to my brother's daughter,
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, and then marry her!
Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin:
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
Is thy name Tyrrel?

TYRREL:
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.

KING RICHARD III:
Art thou, indeed?

TYRREL:
Prove me, my gracious sovereign.

KING RICHARD III:
Darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?

TYRREL:
Ay, my lord;
But I had rather kill two enemies.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, there thou hast it: two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.

TYRREL:
Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.

KING RICHARD III:
Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel
Go, by this token: rise, and lend thine ear:
There is no more but so: say it is done,
And I will love thee, and prefer thee too.

TYRREL:
'Tis done, my gracious lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Shall we hear from thee, Tyrrel, ere we sleep?

TYRREL:
Ye shall, my Lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
My Lord, I have consider'd in my mind
The late demand that you did sound me in.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, let that pass. Dorset is fled to Richmond.

BUCKINGHAM:
I hear that news, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Stanley, he is your wife's son well, look to it.

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, I claim your gift, my due by promise,
For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd;
The earldom of Hereford and the moveables
The which you promised I should possess.

KING RICHARD III:
Stanley, look to your wife; if she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.

BUCKINGHAM:
What says your highness to my just demand?

KING RICHARD III:
As I remember, Henry the Sixth
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
A king, perhaps, perhaps,--

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
How chance the prophet could not at that time
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?

BUCKINGHAM:
My lord, your promise for the earldom,--

KING RICHARD III:
Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle,
And call'd it Rougemont: at which name I started,
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.

BUCKINGHAM:
My Lord!

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, what's o'clock?

BUCKINGHAM:
I am thus bold to put your grace in mind
Of what you promised me.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, but what's o'clock?

BUCKINGHAM:
Upon the stroke of ten.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, let it strike.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why let it strike?

KING RICHARD III:
Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
I am not in the giving vein to-day.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, then resolve me whether you will or no.

KING RICHARD III:
Tut, tut,
Thou troublest me; am not in the vein.

BUCKINGHAM:
Is it even so? rewards he my true service
With such deep contempt made I him king for this?
O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone
To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!

TYRREL:
The tyrannous and bloody deed is done.
The most arch of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn
To do this ruthless piece of butchery,
Although they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs,
Melting with tenderness and kind compassion
Wept like two children in their deaths' sad stories.
'Lo, thus' quoth Dighton, 'lay those tender babes:'
'Thus, thus,' quoth Forrest, 'girdling one another
Within their innocent alabaster arms:
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
Which in their summer beauty kiss'd each other.
A book of prayers on their pillow lay;
Which once,' quoth Forrest, 'almost changed my mind;
But O! the devil'--there the villain stopp'd
Whilst Dighton thus told on: 'We smothered
The most replenished sweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation e'er she framed.'
Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse;
They could not speak; and so I left them both,
To bring this tidings to the bloody king.
And here he comes.
All hail, my sovereign liege!

KING RICHARD III:
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?

TYRREL:
If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
But didst thou see them dead?

TYRREL:
I did, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?

TYRREL:
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them;
But how or in what place I do not know.

KING RICHARD III:
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper,
And thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till soon.
The son of Clarence have I pent up close;
His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage;
The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night.
Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter,
And, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown,
To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer.

CATESBY:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly?

CATESBY:
Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond;
And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.

KING RICHARD III:
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army.
Come, I have heard that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king!
Come, muster men: my counsel is my shield;
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So, now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd,
To watch the waning of mine adversaries.
A dire induction am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret: who comes here?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ah, my young princes! ah, my tender babes!
My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets!
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fix'd in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings
And hear your mother's lamentation!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hover about her; say, that right for right
Hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
So many miseries have crazed my voice,
That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb,
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet.
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs,
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?

QUEEN MARGARET:
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost,
Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocents' blood!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, that thou wouldst as well afford a grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
O, who hath any cause to mourn but I?

QUEEN MARGARET:
If ancient sorrow be most reverend,
Give mine the benefit of seniory,
And let my woes frown on the upper hand.
If sorrow can admit society,
Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine:
I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
I had a Harry, till a Richard kill'd him:
Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him;
Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him;

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard kill'd him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death:
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
That foul defacer of God's handiwork,
That excellent grand tyrant of the earth,
That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls,
Thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee, that this carnal cur
Preys on the issue of his mother's body,
And makes her pew-fellow with others' moan!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes!
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that stabb'd my Edward:
Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
Young York he is but boot, because both they
Match not the high perfection of my loss:
Thy Clarence he is dead that kill'd my Edward;
And the beholders of this tragic play,
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves.
Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor, to buy souls
And send them thither: but at hand, at hand,
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end:
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray.
To have him suddenly convey'd away.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I prey,
That I may live to say, The dog is dead!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad!

QUEEN MARGARET:
I call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune;
I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen;
The presentation of but what I was;
The flattering index of a direful pageant;
One heaved a-high, to be hurl'd down below;
A mother only mock'd with two sweet babes;
A dream of what thou wert, a breath, a bubble,
A sign of dignity, a garish flag,
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
Where is thy husband now? where be thy brothers?
Where are thy children? wherein dost thou, joy?
Who sues to thee and cries 'God save the queen'?
Where be the bending peers that flatter'd thee?
Where be the thronging troops that follow'd thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
For queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care;
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;
For one that scorn'd at me, now scorn'd of me;
For one being fear'd of all, now fearing one;
For one commanding all, obey'd of none.
Thus hath the course of justice wheel'd about,
And left thee but a very prey to time;
Having no more but thought of what thou wert,
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burthen'd yoke;
From which even here I slip my weary neck,
And leave the burthen of it all on thee.
Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance:
These English woes will make me smile in France.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O thou well skill'd in curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;
Compare dead happiness with living woe;
Think that thy babes were fairer than they were,
And he that slew them fouler than he is:
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse:
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My words are dull; O, quicken them with thine!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why should calamity be full of words?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miseries!
Let them have scope: though what they do impart
Help not all, yet do they ease the heart.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
If so, then be not tongue-tied: go with me.
And in the breath of bitter words let's smother
My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smother'd.
I hear his drum: be copious in exclaims.

KING RICHARD III:
Who intercepts my expedition?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O, she that might have intercepted thee,
By strangling thee in her accursed womb
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Hidest thou that forehead with a golden crown,
Where should be graven, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown,
And the dire death of my two sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Where is kind Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?

KING RICHARD III:
A flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
Rail on the Lord's enointed: strike, I say!
Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Art thou my son?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Then patiently hear my impatience.

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O, let me speak!

KING RICHARD III:
Do then: but I'll not hear.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I will be mild and gentle in my speech.

KING RICHARD III:
And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee,
God knows, in anguish, pain and agony.

KING RICHARD III:
And came I not at last to comfort you?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well,
Thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell.
A grievous burthen was thy birth to me;
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious,
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous,
Thy age confirm'd, proud, subdued, bloody,
treacherous,
More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred:
What comfortable hour canst thou name,
That ever graced me in thy company?

KING RICHARD III:
Faith, none, but Humphrey Hour, that call'd
your grace
To breakfast once forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your sight,
Let me march on, and not offend your grace.
Strike the drum.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I prithee, hear me speak.

KING RICHARD III:
You speak too bitterly.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Hear me a word;
For I shall never speak to thee again.

KING RICHARD III:
So.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Either thou wilt die, by God's just ordinance,
Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
And never look upon thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse;
Which, in the day of battle, tire thee more
Than all the complete armour that thou wear'st!
My prayers on the adverse party fight;
And there the little souls of Edward's children
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
And promise them success and victory.
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end;
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me; I say amen to all.

KING RICHARD III:
Stay, madam; I must speak a word with you.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I have no more sons of the royal blood
For thee to murder: for my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens;
And therefore level not to hit their lives.

KING RICHARD III:
You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And must she die for this? O, let her live,
And I'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty;
Slander myself as false to Edward's bed;
Throw over her the veil of infamy:
So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edward's daughter.

KING RICHARD III:
Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To save her life, I'll say she is not so.

KING RICHARD III:
Her life is only safest in her birth.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And only in that safety died her brothers.

KING RICHARD III:
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
No, to their lives bad friends were contrary.

KING RICHARD III:
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
True, when avoided grace makes destiny:
My babes were destined to a fairer death,
If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.

KING RICHARD III:
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle cozen'd
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts,
Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction:
No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes;
And I, in such a desperate bay of death,
Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars,
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Than ever you or yours were by me wrong'd!

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What good is cover'd with the face of heaven,
To be discover'd, that can do me good?

KING RICHARD III:
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads?

KING RICHARD III:
No, to the dignity and height of honour
The high imperial type of this earth's glory.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Flatter my sorrows with report of it;
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?

KING RICHARD III:
Even all I have; yea, and myself and all,
Will I withal endow a child of thine;
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.

KING RICHARD III:
Then know, that from my soul I love thy daughter.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.

KING RICHARD III:
What do you think?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul:
So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers;
And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.

KING RICHARD III:
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
I mean, that with my soul I love thy daughter,
And mean to make her queen of England.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Say then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?

KING RICHARD III:
Even he that makes her queen who should be else?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What, thou?

KING RICHARD III:
I, even I: what think you of it, madam?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
How canst thou woo her?

KING RICHARD III:
That would I learn of you,
As one that are best acquainted with her humour.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
And wilt thou learn of me?

KING RICHARD III:
Madam, with all my heart.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,
A pair of bleeding-hearts; thereon engrave
Edward and York; then haply she will weep:
Therefore present to her--as sometime Margaret
Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood,--
A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body
And bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith.
If this inducement force her not to love,
Send her a story of thy noble acts;
Tell her thou madest away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers; yea, and, for her sake,
Madest quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.

KING RICHARD III:
Come, come, you mock me; this is not the way
To win our daughter.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
There is no other way
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape,
And not be Richard that hath done all this.

KING RICHARD III:
Say that I did all this for love of her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.

KING RICHARD III:
Look, what is done cannot be now amended:
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after hours give leisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
To make amends, Ill give it to your daughter.
If I have kill'd the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter
A grandam's name is little less in love
Than is the doting title of a mother;
They are as children but one step below,
Even of your mettle, of your very blood;
Of an one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
The loss you have is but a son being king,
And by that loss your daughter is made queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
To high promotions and great dignity:
The king, that calls your beauteous daughter wife.
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
Again shall you be mother to a king,
And all the ruins of distressful times
Repair'd with double riches of content.
What! we have many goodly days to see:
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
Shall come again, transform'd to orient pearl,
Advantaging their loan with interest
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
Go, then my mother, to thy daughter go
Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale
Put in her tender heart the aspiring flame
Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the princess
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys
And when this arm of mine hath chastised
The petty rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed;
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
And she shall be sole victress, Caesar's Caesar.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
What were I best to say? her father's brother
Would be her lord? or shall I say, her uncle?
Or, he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the law, my honour and her love,
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?

KING RICHARD III:
Infer fair England's peace by this alliance.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.

KING RICHARD III:
Say that the king, which may command, entreats.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That at her hands which the king's King forbids.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, she shall be a high and mighty queen.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
To wail the tide, as her mother doth.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, I will love her everlastingly.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But how long shall that title 'ever' last?

KING RICHARD III:
Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But how long fairly shall her sweet lie last?

KING RICHARD III:
So long as heaven and nature lengthens it.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
So long as hell and Richard likes of it.

KING RICHARD III:
Say, I, her sovereign, am her subject love.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.

KING RICHARD III:
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.

KING RICHARD III:
Then in plain terms tell her my loving tale.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.

KING RICHARD III:
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead;
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their grave.

KING RICHARD III:
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.

KING RICHARD III:
Now, by my George, my garter, and my crown,--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Profaned, dishonour'd, and the third usurp'd.

KING RICHARD III:
I swear--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
By nothing; for this is no oath:
The George, profaned, hath lost his holy honour;
The garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue;
The crown, usurp'd, disgraced his kingly glory.
if something thou wilt swear to be believed,
Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.

KING RICHARD III:
Now, by the world--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
'Tis full of thy foul wrongs.

KING RICHARD III:
My father's death--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thy life hath that dishonour'd.

KING RICHARD III:
Then, by myself--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thyself thyself misusest.

KING RICHARD III:
Why then, by God--

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
God's wrong is most of all.
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
The unity the king thy brother made
Had not been broken, nor my brother slain:
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him,
The imperial metal, circling now thy brow,
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
And both the princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender playfellows to dust,
Thy broken faith hath made a prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?

KING RICHARD III:
The time to come.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
That thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.
The children live, whose parents thou hast
slaughter'd,
Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age;
The parents live, whose children thou hast butcher'd,
Old wither'd plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come; for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by time misused o'erpast.

KING RICHARD III:
As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous attempt
Of hostile arms! myself myself confound!
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
Day, yield me not thy light; nor, night, thy rest!
Be opposite all planets of good luck
To my proceedings, if, with pure heart's love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter!
In her consists my happiness and thine;
Without her, follows to this land and me,
To thee, herself, and many a Christian soul,
Death, desolation, ruin and decay:
It cannot be avoided but by this;
It will not be avoided but by this.
Therefore, good mother,--I must can you so--
Be the attorney of my love to her:
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve:
Urge the necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish-fond in great designs.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, if the devil tempt thee to do good.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I forget myself to be myself?

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, if yourself's remembrance wrong yourself.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
But thou didst kill my children.

KING RICHARD III:
But in your daughter's womb I bury them:
Where in that nest of spicery they shall breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?

KING RICHARD III:
And be a happy mother by the deed.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I go. Write to me very shortly.
And you shall understand from me her mind.

KING RICHARD III:
Bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.
Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
How now! what news?

RATCLIFF:
My gracious sovereign, on the western coast
Rideth a puissant navy; to the shore
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarm'd, and unresolved to beat them back:
'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.

KING RICHARD III:
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliff, thyself, or Catesby; where is he?

CATESBY:
Here, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Fly to the duke:
Post thou to Salisbury
When thou comest thither--
Dull, unmindful villain,
Why stand'st thou still, and go'st not to the duke?

CATESBY:
First, mighty sovereign, let me know your mind,
What from your grace I shall deliver to him.

KING RICHARD III:
O, true, good Catesby: bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power he can make,
And meet me presently at Salisbury.

CATESBY:
I go.

RATCLIFF:
What is't your highness' pleasure I shall do at
Salisbury?

KING RICHARD III:
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?

RATCLIFF:
Your highness told me I should post before.

KING RICHARD III:
My mind is changed, sir, my mind is changed.
How now, what news with you?

STANLEY:
None good, my lord, to please you with the hearing;
Nor none so bad, but it may well be told.

KING RICHARD III:
Hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad!
Why dost thou run so many mile about,
When thou mayst tell thy tale a nearer way?
Once more, what news?

STANLEY:
Richmond is on the seas.

KING RICHARD III:
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there?

STANLEY:
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.

KING RICHARD III:
Well, sir, as you guess, as you guess?

STANLEY:
Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Ely,
He makes for England, there to claim the crown.

KING RICHARD III:
Is the chair empty? is the sword unsway'd?
Is the king dead? the empire unpossess'd?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is England's king but great York's heir?
Then, tell me, what doth he upon the sea?

STANLEY:
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.

KING RICHARD III:
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt, and fly to him, I fear.

STANLEY:
No, mighty liege; therefore mistrust me not.

KING RICHARD III:
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
Where are thy tenants and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the western shore.
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships!

STANLEY:
No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.

KING RICHARD III:
Cold friends to Richard: what do they in the north,
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?

STANLEY:
They have not been commanded, mighty sovereign:
Please it your majesty to give me leave,
I'll muster up my friends, and meet your grace
Where and what time your majesty shall please.

KING RICHARD III:
Ay, ay. thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond:
I will not trust you, sir.

STANLEY:
Most mighty sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful:
I never was nor never will be false.

KING RICHARD III:
Well,
Go muster men; but, hear you, leave behind
Your son, George Stanley: look your faith be firm.
Or else his head's assurance is but frail.

STANLEY:
So deal with him as I prove true to you.

Messenger:
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate
Bishop of Exeter, his brother there,
With many more confederates, are in arms.

Second Messenger:
My liege, in Kent the Guildfords are in arms;
And every hour more competitors
Flock to their aid, and still their power increaseth.

Third Messenger:
My lord, the army of the Duke of Buckingham--

KING RICHARD III:
Out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death?
Take that, until thou bring me better news.

Third Messenger:
The news I have to tell your majesty
Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters,
Buckingham's army is dispersed and scatter'd;
And he himself wander'd away alone,
No man knows whither.

KING RICHARD III:
I cry thee mercy:
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
Hath any well-advised friend proclaim'd
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?

Third Messenger:
Such proclamation hath been made, my liege.

Fourth Messenger:
Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquis Dorset,
'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
Yet this good comfort bring I to your grace,
The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest:
Richmond, in Yorkshire, sent out a boat
Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
If they were his assistants, yea or no;
Who answer'd him, they came from Buckingham.
Upon his party: he, mistrusting them,
Hoisted sail and made away for Brittany.

KING RICHARD III:
March on, march on, since we are up in arms;
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.

CATESBY:
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken;
That is the best news: that the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.

KING RICHARD III:
Away towards Salisbury! while we reason here,
A royal battle might be won and lost
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.

DERBY:
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of this most bloody boar
My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold:
If I revolt, off goes young George's head;
The fear of that withholds my present aid.
But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?

CHRISTOPHER:
At Pembroke, or at Harford-west, in Wales.

DERBY:
What men of name resort to him?

CHRISTOPHER:
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier;
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley;
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas with a valiant crew;
And many more of noble fame and worth:
And towards London they do bend their course,
If by the way they be not fought withal.

DERBY:
Return unto thy lord; commend me to him:
Tell him the queen hath heartily consented
He shall espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
These letters will resolve him of my mind. Farewell.

BUCKINGHAM:
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?

Sheriff:
No, my good lord; therefore be patient.

BUCKINGHAM:
Hastings, and Edward's children, Rivers, Grey,
Holy King Henry, and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
By underhand corrupted foul injustice,
If that your moody discontented souls
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction!
This is All-Souls' day, fellows, is it not?

Sheriff:
It is, my lord.

BUCKINGHAM:
Why, then All-Souls' day is my body's doomsday.
This is the day that, in King Edward's time,
I wish't might fall on me, when I was found
False to his children or his wife's allies
This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall
By the false faith of him I trusted most;
This, this All-Souls' day to my fearful soul
Is the determined respite of my wrongs:
That high All-Seer that I dallied with
Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head
And given in earnest what I begg'd in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points on their masters' bosoms:
Now Margaret's curse is fallen upon my head;
'When he,' quoth she, 'shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a prophetess.'
Come, sirs, convey me to the block of shame;
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.

RICHMOND:
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we march'd on without impediment;
And here receive we from our father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
That spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
In your embowell'd bosoms, this foul swine
Lies now even in the centre of this isle,
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn
From Tamworth thither is but one day's march.
In God's name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
By this one bloody trial of sharp war.

OXFORD:
Every man's conscience is a thousand swords,
To fight against that bloody homicide.

HERBERT:
I doubt not but his friends will fly to us.

BLUNT:
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.
Which in his greatest need will shrink from him.

RICHMOND:
All for our vantage. Then, in God's name, march:
True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings:
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.

KING RICHARD III:
Here pitch our tents, even here in Bosworth field.
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?

SURREY:
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.

KING RICHARD III:
My Lord of Norfolk,--

NORFOLK:
Here, most gracious liege.

KING RICHARD III:
Norfolk, we must have knocks; ha! must we not?

NORFOLK:
We must both give and take, my gracious lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Up with my tent there! here will I lie tonight;
But where to-morrow?  Well, all's one for that.
Who hath descried the number of the foe?

NORFOLK:
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.

KING RICHARD III:
Why, our battalion trebles that account:
Besides, the king's name is a tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse party want.
Up with my tent there! Valiant gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the field
Call for some men of sound direction
Let's want no discipline, make no delay,
For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day.

RICHMOND:
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
And by the bright track of his fiery car,
Gives signal, of a goodly day to-morrow.
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.
Give me some ink and paper in my tent
I'll draw the form and model of our battle,
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small strength.
My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,
And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment:
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good night to him
And by the second hour in the morning
Desire the earl to see me in my tent:
Yet one thing more, good Blunt, before thou go'st,
Where is Lord Stanley quarter'd, dost thou know?

BLUNT:
Unless I have mista'en his colours much,
Which well I am assured I have not done,
His regiment lies half a mile at least
South from the mighty power of the king.

RICHMOND:
If without peril it be possible,
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him,
And give him from me this most needful scroll.

BLUNT:
Upon my life, my lord, I'll under-take it;
And so, God give you quiet rest to-night!

RICHMOND:
Good night, good Captain Blunt. Come gentlemen,
Let us consult upon to-morrow's business
In to our tent; the air is raw and cold.

KING RICHARD III:
What is't o'clock?

CATESBY:
It's supper-time, my lord;
It's nine o'clock.

KING RICHARD III:
I will not sup to-night.
Give me some ink and paper.
What, is my beaver easier than it was?
And all my armour laid into my tent?

CATESBY:
If is, my liege; and all things are in readiness.

KING RICHARD III:
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.

NORFOLK:
I go, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk.

NORFOLK:
I warrant you, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Catesby!

CATESBY:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Send out a pursuivant at arms
To Stanley's regiment; bid him bring his power
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.
Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.
Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
Ratcliff!

RATCLIFF:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?

RATCLIFF:
Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself,
Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.

KING RICHARD III:
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine:
I have not that alacrity of spirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?

RATCLIFF:
It is, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Bid my guard watch; leave me.
Ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent
And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.

DERBY:
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!

RICHMOND:
All comfort that the dark night can afford
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
Tell me, how fares our loving mother?

DERBY:
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother
Who prays continually for Richmond's good:
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
In brief,--for so the season bids us be,--
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
I, as I may--that which I would I cannot,--
With best advantage will deceive the time,
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms:
But on thy side I may not be too forward
Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
Be executed in his father's sight.
Farewell: the leisure and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
And ample interchange of sweet discourse,
Which so long sunder'd friends should dwell upon:
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
Once more, adieu: be valiant, and speed well!

RICHMOND:
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment:
I'll strive, with troubled thoughts, to take a nap,
Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow,
When I should mount with wings of victory:
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
O Thou, whose captain I account myself,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye;
Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
The usurping helmets of our adversaries!
Make us thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise thee in the victory!
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes:
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!

Ghost of Prince Edward:

Ghost of King Henry VI:

Ghost of CLARENCE:

Ghost of RIVERS:

Ghost of GREY:

Ghost of VAUGHAN:

All:

Ghost of HASTINGS:

Ghosts of young Princes:

Ghost of LADY ANNE:

Ghost of BUCKINGHAM:

KING RICHARD III:
Give me another horse: bind up my wounds.
Have mercy, Jesu!--Soft! I did but dream.
O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!
The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What do I fear?  myself?  there's none else by:
Richard loves Richard; that is, I am I.
Is there a murderer here?  No. Yes, I am:
Then fly. What, from myself?   Great reason why:
Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself?
Alack. I love myself. Wherefore?  for any good
That I myself have done unto myself?
O, no! alas, I rather hate myself
For hateful deeds committed by myself!
I am a villain: yet I lie. I am not.
Fool, of thyself speak well: fool, do not flatter.
My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.
Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree
Murder, stem murder, in the direst degree;
All several sins, all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all, Guilty! guilty!
I shall despair. There is no creature loves me;
And if I die, no soul shall pity me:
Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself
Find in myself no pity to myself?
Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd
Came to my tent; and every one did threat
To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard.

RATCLIFF:
My lord!

KING RICHARD III:
'Zounds! who is there?

RATCLIFF:
Ratcliff, my lord; 'tis I. The early village-cock
Hath twice done salutation to the morn;
Your friends are up, and buckle on their armour.

KING RICHARD III:
O Ratcliff, I have dream'd a fearful dream!
What thinkest thou, will our friends prove all true?

RATCLIFF:
No doubt, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
O Ratcliff, I fear, I fear,--

RATCLIFF:
Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.

KING RICHARD III:
By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond.
It is not yet near day. Come, go with me;
Under our tents I'll play the eaves-dropper,
To see if any mean to shrink from me.

LORDS:
Good morrow, Richmond!

RICHMOND:
Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,
That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.

LORDS:
How have you slept, my lord?

RICHMOND:
The sweetest sleep, and fairest-boding dreams
That ever enter'd in a drowsy head,
Have I since your departure had, my lords.
Methought their souls, whose bodies Richard murder'd,
Came to my tent, and cried on victory:
I promise you, my soul is very jocund
In the remembrance of so fair a dream.
How far into the morning is it, lords?

LORDS:
Upon the stroke of four.

RICHMOND:
Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction.
More than I have said, loving countrymen,
The leisure and enforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell upon: yet remember this,
God and our good cause fight upon our side;
The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls,
Like high-rear'd bulwarks, stand before our faces;
Richard except, those whom we fight against
Had rather have us win than him they follow:
For what is he they follow?  truly, gentlemen,
A bloody tyrant and a homicide;
One raised in blood, and one in blood establish'd;
One that made means to come by what he hath,
And slaughter'd those that were the means to help him;
Abase foul stone, made precious by the foil
Of England's chair, where he is falsely set;
One that hath ever been God's enemy:
Then, if you fight against God's enemy,
God will in justice ward you as his soldiers;
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;
If you do fight against your country's foes,
Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire;
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors;
If you do free your children from the sword,
Your children's children quit it in your age.
Then, in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your standards, draw your willing swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt
Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face;
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully;
God and Saint George! Richmond and victory!

KING RICHARD III:
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?

RATCLIFF:
That he was never trained up in arms.

KING RICHARD III:
He said the truth: and what said Surrey then?

RATCLIFF:
He smiled and said 'The better for our purpose.'

KING RICHARD III:
He was in the right; and so indeed it is.
Ten the clock there. Give me a calendar.
Who saw the sun to-day?

RATCLIFF:
Not I, my lord.

KING RICHARD III:
Then he disdains to shine; for by the book
He should have braved the east an hour ago
A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliff!

RATCLIFF:
My lord?

KING RICHARD III:
The sun will not be seen to-day;
The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
Not shine to-day! Why, what is that to me
More than to Richmond?  for the selfsame heaven
That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.

NORFOLK:
Arm, arm, my lord; the foe vaunts in the field.

KING RICHARD III:
Come, bustle, bustle; caparison my horse.
Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power:
I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,
And thus my battle shall be ordered:
My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,
Consisting equally of horse and foot;
Our archers shall be placed in the midst
John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.
They thus directed, we will follow
In the main battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.
This, and Saint George to boot! What think'st thou, Norfolk?

NORFOLK:
A good direction, warlike sovereign.
This found I on my tent this morning.

KING RICHARD III:

Messenger:
My lord, he doth deny to come.

KING RICHARD III:
Off with his son George's head!

NORFOLK:
My lord, the enemy is past the marsh
After the battle let George Stanley die.

KING RICHARD III:
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom:
Advance our standards, set upon our foes
Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,
Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!
Upon them! victory sits on our helms.

CATESBY:
Rescue, my Lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!
The king enacts more wonders than a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger:
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.
Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!

KING RICHARD III:
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!

CATESBY:
Withdraw, my lord; I'll help you to a horse.

KING RICHARD III:
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the die:
I think there be six Richmonds in the field;
Five have I slain to-day instead of him.
A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse!

RICHMOND:
God and your arms be praised, victorious friends,
The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.

DERBY:
Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee.
Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty
From the dead temples of this bloody wretch
Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal:
Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.

RICHMOND:
Great God of heaven, say Amen to all!
But, tell me, is young George Stanley living?

DERBY:
He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town;
Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.

RICHMOND:
What men of name are slain on either side?

DERBY:
John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers,
Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.

RICHMOND:
Inter their bodies as becomes their births:
Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled
That in submission will return to us:
And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
We will unite the white rose and the red:
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,
That long have frown'd upon their enmity!
What traitor hears me, and says not amen?
England hath long been mad, and scarr'd herself;
The brother blindly shed the brother's blood,
The father rashly slaughter'd his own son,
The son, compell'd, been butcher to the sire:
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided in their dire division,
O, now, let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true succeeders of each royal house,
By God's fair ordinance conjoin together!
And let their heirs, God, if thy will be so.
Enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace,
With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days!
Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again,
And make poor England weep in streams of blood!
Let them not live to taste this land's increase
That would with treason wound this fair land's peace!
Now civil wounds are stopp'd, peace lives again:
That she may long live here, God say amen!

KING RICHARD II:
Old John of Gaunt, time-honour'd Lancaster,
Hast thou, according to thy oath and band,
Brought hither Henry Hereford thy bold son,
Here to make good the boisterous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let us hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
I have, my liege.

KING RICHARD II:
Tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him,
If he appeal the duke on ancient malice;
Or worthily, as a good subject should,
On some known ground of treachery in him?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
On some apparent danger seen in him
Aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.

KING RICHARD II:
Then call them to our presence; face to face,
And frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear
The accuser and the accused freely speak:
High-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire,
In rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Many years of happy days befal
My gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Each day still better other's happiness;
Until the heavens, envying earth's good hap,
Add an immortal title to your crown!

KING RICHARD II:
We thank you both: yet one but flatters us,
As well appeareth by the cause you come;
Namely to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
First, heaven be the record to my speech!
In the devotion of a subject's love,
Tendering the precious safety of my prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appellant to this princely presence.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and a miscreant,
Too good to be so and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat;
And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move,
What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:
'Tis not the trial of a woman's war,
The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain;
The blood is hot that must be cool'd for this:
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast
As to be hush'd and nought at all to say:
First, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech;
Which else would post until it had return'd
These terms of treason doubled down his throat.
Setting aside his high blood's royalty,
And let him be no kinsman to my liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him;
Call him a slanderous coward and a villain:
Which to maintain I would allow him odds,
And meet him, were I tied to run afoot
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable,
Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
Mean time let this defend my loyalty,
By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of the king,
And lay aside my high blood's royalty,
Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have left thee so much strength
As to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop:
By that and all the rites of knighthood else,
Will I make good against thee, arm to arm,
What I have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
I take it up; and by that sword I swear
Which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder,
I'll answer thee in any fair degree,
Or chivalrous design of knightly trial:
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
If I be traitor or unjustly fight!

KING RICHARD II:
What doth our cousin lay to Mowbray's charge?
It must be great that can inherit us
So much as of a thought of ill in him.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Look, what I speak, my life shall prove it true;
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles
In name of lendings for your highness' soldiers,
The which he hath detain'd for lewd employments,
Like a false traitor and injurious villain.
Besides I say and will in battle prove,
Or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge
That ever was survey'd by English eye,
That all the treasons for these eighteen years
Complotted and contrived in this land
Fetch from false Mowbray their first head and spring.
Further I say and further will maintain
Upon his bad life to make all this good,
That he did plot the Duke of Gloucester's death,
Suggest his soon-believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a traitor coward,
Sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood:
Which blood, like sacrificing Abel's, cries,
Even from the tongueless caverns of the earth,
To me for justice and rough chastisement;
And, by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.

KING RICHARD II:
How high a pitch his resolution soars!
Thomas of Norfolk, what say'st thou to this?

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
O, let my sovereign turn away his face
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood,
How God and good men hate so foul a liar.

KING RICHARD II:
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears:
Were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir,
As he is but my father's brother's son,
Now, by my sceptre's awe, I make a vow,
Such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood
Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize
The unstooping firmness of my upright soul:
He is our subject, Mowbray; so art thou:
Free speech and fearless I to thee allow.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart,
Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.
Three parts of that receipt I had for Calais
Disbursed I duly to his highness' soldiers;
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my sovereign liege was in my debt
Upon remainder of a dear account,
Since last I went to France to fetch his queen:
Now swallow down that lie. For Gloucester's death,
I slew him not; but to my own disgrace
Neglected my sworn duty in that case.
For you, my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honourable father to my foe
Once did I lay an ambush for your life,
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul
But ere I last received the sacrament
I did confess it, and exactly begg'd
Your grace's pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd,
It issues from the rancour of a villain,
A recreant and most degenerate traitor
Which in myself I boldly will defend;
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this overweening traitor's foot,
To prove myself a loyal gentleman
Even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom.
In haste whereof, most heartily I pray
Your highness to assign our trial day.

KING RICHARD II:
Wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me;
Let's purge this choler without letting blood:
This we prescribe, though no physician;
Deep malice makes too deep incision;
Forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed;
Our doctors say this is no month to bleed.
Good uncle, let this end where it begun;
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
To be a make-peace shall become my age:
Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.

KING RICHARD II:
And, Norfolk, throw down his.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
When, Harry, when?
Obedience bids I should not bid again.

KING RICHARD II:
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Myself I throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot.
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame:
The one my duty owes; but my fair name,
Despite of death that lives upon my grave,
To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.
I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here,
Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear,
The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood
Which breathed this poison.

KING RICHARD II:
Rage must be withstood:
Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame.
And I resign my gage. My dear dear lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation: that away,
Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest
Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.
Mine honour is my life; both grow in one:
Take honour from me, and my life is done:
Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try;
In that I live and for that will I die.

KING RICHARD II:
Cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O, God defend my soul from such deep sin!
Shall I seem crest-fall'n in my father's sight?
Or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height
Before this out-dared dastard? Ere my tongue
Shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong,
Or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear,
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbray's face.

KING RICHARD II:
We were not born to sue, but to command;
Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
Be ready, as your lives shall answer it,
At Coventry, upon Saint Lambert's day:
There shall your swords and lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate:
Since we can not atone you, we shall see
Justice design the victor's chivalry.
Lord marshal, command our officers at arms
Be ready to direct these home alarms.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Alas, the part I had in Woodstock's blood
Doth more solicit me than your exclaims,
To stir against the butchers of his life!
But since correction lieth in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven;
Who, when they see the hours ripe on earth,
Will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.

DUCHESS:
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one,
Were as seven vials of his sacred blood,
Or seven fair branches springing from one root:
Some of those seven are dried by nature's course,
Some of those branches by the Destinies cut;
But Thomas, my dear lord, my life, my Gloucester,
One vial full of Edward's sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most royal root,
Is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt,
Is hack'd down, and his summer leaves all faded,
By envy's hand and murder's bloody axe.
Ah, Gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb,
That metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee
Made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest,
Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent
In some large measure to thy father's death,
In that thou seest thy wretched brother die,
Who was the model of thy father's life.
Call it not patience, Gaunt; it is despair:
In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughter'd,
Thou showest the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching stern murder how to butcher thee:
That which in mean men we intitle patience
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts.
What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
God's is the quarrel; for God's substitute,
His deputy anointed in His sight,
Hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully,
Let heaven revenge; for I may never lift
An angry arm against His minister.

DUCHESS:
Where then, alas, may I complain myself?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
To God, the widow's champion and defence.

DUCHESS:
Why, then, I will. Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thou goest to Coventry, there to behold
Our cousin Hereford and fell Mowbray fight:
O, sit my husband's wrongs on Hereford's spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbray's breast!
Or, if misfortune miss the first career,
Be Mowbray's sins so heavy in his bosom,
They may break his foaming courser's back,
And throw the rider headlong in the lists,
A caitiff recreant to my cousin Hereford!
Farewell, old Gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife
With her companion grief must end her life.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Sister, farewell; I must to Coventry:
As much good stay with thee as go with me!

DUCHESS:
Yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls,
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:
I take my leave before I have begun,
For sorrow ends not when it seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother, Edmund York.
Lo, this is all:--nay, yet depart not so;
Though this be all, do not so quickly go;
I shall remember more. Bid him--ah, what?--
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls,
Unpeopled offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me; let him not come there,
To seek out sorrow that dwells every where.
Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die:
The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.

Lord Marshal:
My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.

Lord Marshal:
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay
For nothing but his majesty's approach.

KING RICHARD II:
Marshal, demand of yonder champion
The cause of his arrival here in arms:
Ask him his name and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal:
In God's name and the king's, say who thou art
And why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms,
Against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel:
Speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;
As so defend thee heaven and thy valour!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
My name is Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk;
Who hither come engaged by my oath--
Which God defend a knight should violate!--
Both to defend my loyalty and truth
To God, my king and my succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Hereford that appeals me
And, by the grace of God and this mine arm,
To prove him, in defending of myself,
A traitor to my God, my king, and me:
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

KING RICHARD II:
Marshal, ask yonder knight in arms,
Both who he is and why he cometh hither
Thus plated in habiliments of war,
And formally, according to our law,
Depose him in the justice of his cause.

Lord Marshal:
What is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither,
Before King Richard in his royal lists?
Against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel?
Speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby
Am I; who ready here do stand in arms,
To prove, by God's grace and my body's valour,
In lists, on Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
That he is a traitor, foul and dangerous,
To God of heaven, King Richard and to me;
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven!

Lord Marshal:
On pain of death, no person be so bold
Or daring-hardy as to touch the lists,
Except the marshal and such officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand,
And bow my knee before his majesty:
For Mowbray and myself are like two men
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage;
Then let us take a ceremonious leave
And loving farewell of our several friends.

Lord Marshal:
The appellant in all duty greets your highness,
And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.

KING RICHARD II:
We will descend and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right,
So be thy fortune in this royal fight!
Farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed,
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear:
As confident as is the falcon's flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take my leave of you;
Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.
Lo, as at English feasts, so I regreet
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet:
O thou, the earthly author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit, in me regenerate,
Doth with a twofold vigour lift me up
To reach at victory above my head,
Add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers;
And with thy blessings steel my lance's point,
That it may enter Mowbray's waxen coat,
And furbish new the name of John a Gaunt,
Even in the lusty havior of his son.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
God in thy good cause make thee prosperous!
Be swift like lightning in the execution;
And let thy blows, doubly redoubled,
Fall like amazing thunder on the casque
Of thy adverse pernicious enemy:
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Mine innocency and Saint George to thrive!

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
However God or fortune cast my lot,
There lives or dies, true to King Richard's throne,
A loyal, just and upright gentleman:
Never did captive with a freer heart
Cast off his chains of bondage and embrace
His golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement,
More than my dancing soul doth celebrate
This feast of battle with mine adversary.
Most mighty liege, and my companion peers,
Take from my mouth the wish of happy years:
As gentle and as jocund as to jest
Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.

KING RICHARD II:
Farewell, my lord: securely I espy
Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.
Order the trial, marshal, and begin.

Lord Marshal:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
Receive thy lance; and God defend the right!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.

Lord Marshal:
Go bear this lance to Thomas, Duke of Norfolk.

First Herald:
Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby,
Stands here for God, his sovereign and himself,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
A traitor to his God, his king and him;
And dares him to set forward to the fight.

Second Herald:
Here standeth Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself and to approve
Henry of Hereford, Lancaster, and Derby,
To God, his sovereign and to him disloyal;
Courageously and with a free desire
Attending but the signal to begin.

Lord Marshal:
Sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.

KING RICHARD II:
Let them lay by their helmets and their spears,
And both return back to their chairs again:
Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound
While we return these dukes what we decree.
Draw near,
And list what with our council we have done.
For that our kingdom's earth should not be soil'd
With that dear blood which it hath fostered;
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword;
And for we think the eagle-winged pride
Of sky-aspiring and ambitious thoughts,
With rival-hating envy, set on you
To wake our peace, which in our country's cradle
Draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep;
Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,
With harsh resounding trumpets' dreadful bray,
And grating shock of wrathful iron arms,
Might from our quiet confines fright fair peace
And make us wade even in our kindred's blood,
Therefore, we banish you our territories:
You, cousin Hereford, upon pain of life,
Till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields
Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Your will be done: this must my comfort be,
Sun that warms you here shall shine on me;
And those his golden beams to you here lent
Shall point on me and gild my banishment.

KING RICHARD II:
Norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce:
The sly slow hours shall not determinate
The dateless limit of thy dear exile;
The hopeless word of 'never to return'
Breathe I against thee, upon pain of life.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
A heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege,
And all unlook'd for from your highness' mouth:
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim
As to be cast forth in the common air,
Have I deserved at your highness' hands.
The language I have learn'd these forty years,
My native English, now I must forego:
And now my tongue's use is to me no more
Than an unstringed viol or a harp,
Or like a cunning instrument cased up,
Or, being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony:
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
Doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips;
And dull unfeeling barren ignorance
Is made my gaoler to attend on me.
I am too old to fawn upon a nurse,
Too far in years to be a pupil now:
What is thy sentence then but speechless death,
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?

KING RICHARD II:
It boots thee not to be compassionate:
After our sentence plaining comes too late.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
Then thus I turn me from my country's light,
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

KING RICHARD II:
Return again, and take an oath with thee.
Lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands;
Swear by the duty that you owe to God--
Our part therein we banish with yourselves--
To keep the oath that we administer:
You never shall, so help you truth and God!
Embrace each other's love in banishment;
Nor never look upon each other's face;
Nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile
This louring tempest of your home-bred hate;
Nor never by advised purpose meet
To plot, contrive, or complot any ill
'Gainst us, our state, our subjects, or our land.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I swear.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
And I, to keep all this.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:--
By this time, had the king permitted us,
One of our souls had wander'd in the air.
Banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
As now our flesh is banish'd from this land:
Confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm;
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
The clogging burthen of a guilty soul.

THOMAS MOWBRAY:
No, Bolingbroke: if ever I were traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of life,
And I from heaven banish'd as from hence!
But what thou art, God, thou, and I do know;
And all too soon, I fear, the king shall rue.
Farewell, my liege. Now no way can I stray;
Save back to England, all the world's my way.

KING RICHARD II:
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect
Hath from the number of his banish'd years
Pluck'd four away.
Six frozen winter spent,
Return with welcome home from banishment.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
How long a time lies in one little word!
Four lagging winters and four wanton springs
End in a word: such is the breath of kings.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
I thank my liege, that in regard of me
He shortens four years of my son's exile:
But little vantage shall I reap thereby;
For, ere the six years that he hath to spend
Can change their moons and bring their times about
My oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light
Shall be extinct with age and endless night;
My inch of taper will be burnt and done,
And blindfold death not let me see my son.

KING RICHARD II:
Why uncle, thou hast many years to live.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
But not a minute, king, that thou canst give:
Shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow;
Thou canst help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage;
Thy word is current with him for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.

KING RICHARD II:
Thy son is banish'd upon good advice,
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave:
Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.
You urged me as a judge; but I had rather
You would have bid me argue like a father.
O, had it been a stranger, not my child,
To smooth his fault I should have been more mild:
A partial slander sought I to avoid,
And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.
Alas, I look'd when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make mine own away;
But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue
Against my will to do myself this wrong.

KING RICHARD II:
Cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so:
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know,
From where you do remain let paper show.

Lord Marshal:
My lord, no leave take I; for I will ride,
As far as land will let me, by your side.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
That thou return'st no greeting to thy friends?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I have too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongue's office should be prodigal
To breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
What is six winters? they are quickly gone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
To men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My heart will sigh when I miscall it so,
Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
The sullen passage of thy weary steps
Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set
The precious jewel of thy home return.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make
Will but remember me what a deal of world
I wander from the jewels that I love.
Must I not serve a long apprenticehood
To foreign passages, and in the end,
Having my freedom, boast of nothing else
But that I was a journeyman to grief?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
All places that the eye of heaven visits
Are to a wise man ports and happy havens.
Teach thy necessity to reason thus;
There is no virtue like necessity.
Think not the king did banish thee,
But thou the king. Woe doth the heavier sit,
Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.
Go, say I sent thee forth to purchase honour
And not the king exiled thee; or suppose
Devouring pestilence hangs in our air
And thou art flying to a fresher clime:
Look, what thy soul holds dear, imagine it
To lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest:
Suppose the singing birds musicians,
The grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd,
The flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more
Than a delightful measure or a dance;
For gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite
The man that mocks at it and sets it light.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O, who can hold a fire in his hand
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow
By thinking on fantastic summer's heat?
O, no! the apprehension of the good
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
Fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more
Than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way:
Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Then, England's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu;
My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet!
Where'er I wander, boast of this I can,
Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.

KING RICHARD II:
We did observe. Cousin Aumerle,
How far brought you high Hereford on his way?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I brought high Hereford, if you call him so,
But to the next highway, and there I left him.

KING RICHARD II:
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Faith, none for me; except the north-east wind,
Which then blew bitterly against our faces,
Awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.

KING RICHARD II:
What said our cousin when you parted with him?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
'Farewell:'
And, for my heart disdained that my tongue
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
To counterfeit oppression of such grief
That words seem'd buried in my sorrow's grave.
Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of farewells;
But since it would not, he had none of me.

KING RICHARD II:
He is our cousin, cousin; but 'tis doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.
Ourself and Bushy, Bagot here and Green
Observed his courtship to the common people;
How he did seem to dive into their hearts
With humble and familiar courtesy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves,
Wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles
And patient underbearing of his fortune,
As 'twere to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench;
A brace of draymen bid God speed him well
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With 'Thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;'
As were our England in reversion his,
And he our subjects' next degree in hope.

GREEN:
Well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts.
Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland,
Expedient manage must be made, my liege,
Ere further leisure yield them further means
For their advantage and your highness' loss.

KING RICHARD II:
We will ourself in person to this war:
And, for our coffers, with too great a court
And liberal largess, are grown somewhat light,
We are inforced to farm our royal realm;
The revenue whereof shall furnish us
For our affairs in hand: if that come short,
Our substitutes at home shall have blank charters;
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large sums of gold
And send them after to supply our wants;
For we will make for Ireland presently.
Bushy, what news?

BUSHY:
Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord,
Suddenly taken; and hath sent post haste
To entreat your majesty to visit him.

KING RICHARD II:
Where lies he?

BUSHY:
At Ely House.

KING RICHARD II:
Now put it, God, in the physician's mind
To help him to his grave immediately!
The lining of his coffers shall make coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him:
Pray God we may make haste, and come too late!

All:
Amen.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Will the king come, that I may breathe my last
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?

DUKE OF YORK:
Vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath;
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, but they say the tongues of dying men
Enforce attention like deep harmony:
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.
He that no more must say is listen'd more
Than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose;
More are men's ends mark'd than their lives before:
The setting sun, and music at the close,
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance more than things long past:
Though Richard my life's counsel would not hear,
My death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.

DUKE OF YORK:
No; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds,
As praises, of whose taste the wise are fond,
Lascivious metres, to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth doth always listen;
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose manners still our tardy apish nation
Limps after in base imitation.
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity--
So it be new, there's no respect how vile--
That is not quickly buzzed into his ears?
Then all too late comes counsel to be heard,
Where will doth mutiny with wit's regard.
Direct not him whose way himself will choose:
'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Methinks I am a prophet new inspired
And thus expiring do foretell of him:
His rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves;
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short;
He tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes;
With eager feeding food doth choke the feeder:
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means, soon preys upon itself.
This royal throne of kings, this scepter'd isle,
This earth of majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi-paradise,
This fortress built by Nature for herself
Against infection and the hand of war,
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a moat defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
Fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth,
Renowned for their deeds as far from home,
For Christian service and true chivalry,
As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jewry,
Of the world's ransom, blessed Mary's Son,
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now leased out, I die pronouncing it,
Like to a tenement or pelting farm:
England, bound in with the triumphant sea
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With inky blots and rotten parchment bonds:
That England, that was wont to conquer others,
Hath made a shameful conquest of itself.
Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death!

DUKE OF YORK:
The king is come: deal mildly with his youth;
For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.

QUEEN:
How fares our noble uncle, Lancaster?

KING RICHARD II:
What comfort, man? how is't with aged Gaunt?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O how that name befits my composition!
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast;
And who abstains from meat that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watch'd;
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt:
The pleasure that some fathers feed upon,
Is my strict fast; I mean, my children's looks;
And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.

KING RICHARD II:
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
No, misery makes sport to mock itself:
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me,
I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.

KING RICHARD II:
Should dying men flatter with those that live?

JOHN OF GAUNT:
No, no, men living flatter those that die.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, no! thou diest, though I the sicker be.

KING RICHARD II:
I am in health, I breathe, and see thee ill.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
Now He that made me knows I see thee ill;
Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.
Thy death-bed is no lesser than thy land
Wherein thou liest in reputation sick;
And thou, too careless patient as thou art,
Commit'st thy anointed body to the cure
Of those physicians that first wounded thee:
A thousand flatterers sit within thy crown,
Whose compass is no bigger than thy head;
And yet, incaged in so small a verge,
The waste is no whit lesser than thy land.
O, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye
Seen how his son's son should destroy his sons,
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
Deposing thee before thou wert possess'd,
Which art possess'd now to depose thyself.
Why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world,
It were a shame to let this land by lease;
But for thy world enjoying but this land,
Is it not more than shame to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou now, not king:
Thy state of law is bondslave to the law; And thou--

KING RICHARD II:
A lunatic lean-witted fool,
Presuming on an ague's privilege,
Darest with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood
With fury from his native residence.
Now, by my seat's right royal majesty,
Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head
Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.

JOHN OF GAUNT:
O, spare me not, my brother Edward's son,
For that I was his father Edward's son;
That blood already, like the pelican,
Hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused:
My brother Gloucester, plain well-meaning soul,
Whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls!
May be a precedent and witness good
That thou respect'st not spilling Edward's blood:
Join with the present sickness that I have;
And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
To crop at once a too long wither'd flower.
Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee!
These words hereafter thy tormentors be!
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave:
Love they to live that love and honour have.

KING RICHARD II:
And let them die that age and sullens have;
For both hast thou, and both become the grave.

DUKE OF YORK:
I do beseech your majesty, impute his words
To wayward sickliness and age in him:
He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear
As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.

KING RICHARD II:
Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his;
As theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My liege, old Gaunt commends him to your majesty.

KING RICHARD II:
What says he?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nay, nothing; all is said
His tongue is now a stringless instrument;
Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.

DUKE OF YORK:
Be York the next that must be bankrupt so!
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

KING RICHARD II:
The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he;
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars:
We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns,
Which live like venom where no venom else
But only they have privilege to live.
And for these great affairs do ask some charge,
Towards our assistance we do seize to us
The plate, corn, revenues and moveables,
Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.

DUKE OF YORK:
How long shall I be patient? ah, how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Gloucester's death, nor Hereford's banishment
Not Gaunt's rebukes, nor England's private wrongs,
Nor the prevention of poor Bolingbroke
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace,
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
Or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face.
I am the last of noble Edward's sons,
Of whom thy father, Prince of Wales, was first:
In war was never lion raged more fierce,
In peace was never gentle lamb more mild,
Than was that young and princely gentleman.
His face thou hast, for even so look'd he,
Accomplish'd with the number of thy hours;
But when he frown'd, it was against the French
And not against his friends; his noble hand
Did will what he did spend and spent not that
Which his triumphant father's hand had won;
His hands were guilty of no kindred blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin.
O Richard! York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.

KING RICHARD II:
Why, uncle, what's the matter?

DUKE OF YORK:
O my liege,
Pardon me, if you please; if not, I, pleased
Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.
Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands
The royalties and rights of banish'd Hereford?
Is not Gaunt dead, and doth not Hereford live?
Was not Gaunt just, and is not Harry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deserving son?
Take Hereford's rights away, and take from Time
His charters and his customary rights;
Let not to-morrow then ensue to-day;
Be not thyself; for how art thou a king
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now, afore God--God forbid I say true!--
If you do wrongfully seize Hereford's rights,
Call in the letters patent that he hath
By his attorneys-general to sue
His livery, and deny his offer'd homage,
You pluck a thousand dangers on your head,
You lose a thousand well-disposed hearts
And prick my tender patience, to those thoughts
Which honour and allegiance cannot think.

KING RICHARD II:
Think what you will, we seize into our hands
His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.

DUKE OF YORK:
I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell:
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell;
But by bad courses may be understood
That their events can never fall out good.

KING RICHARD II:
Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight:
Bid him repair to us to Ely House
To see this business. To-morrow next
We will for Ireland; and 'tis time, I trow:
And we create, in absence of ourself,
Our uncle York lord governor of England;
For he is just and always loved us well.
Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;
Be merry, for our time of stay is short

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.

LORD ROSS:
And living too; for now his son is duke.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Barely in title, not in revenue.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Richly in both, if justice had her right.

LORD ROSS:
My heart is great; but it must break with silence,
Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm!

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Tends that thou wouldst speak to the Duke of Hereford?
If it be so, out with it boldly, man;
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.

LORD ROSS:
No good at all that I can do for him;
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne
In him, a royal prince, and many moe
Of noble blood in this declining land.
The king is not himself, but basely led
By flatterers; and what they will inform,
Merely in hate, 'gainst any of us all,
That will the king severely prosecute
'Gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.

LORD ROSS:
The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes,
And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
And daily new exactions are devised,
As blanks, benevolences, and I wot not what:
But what, o' God's name, doth become of this?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not,
But basely yielded upon compromise
That which his noble ancestors achieved with blows:
More hath he spent in peace than they in wars.

LORD ROSS:
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in farm.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
The king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.

LORD ROSS:
He hath not money for these Irish wars,
His burthenous taxations notwithstanding,
But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
His noble kinsman: most degenerate king!
But, lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet see no shelter to avoid the storm;
We see the wind sit sore upon our sails,
And yet we strike not, but securely perish.

LORD ROSS:
We see the very wreck that we must suffer;
And unavoided is the danger now,
For suffering so the causes of our wreck.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Not so; even through the hollow eyes of death
I spy life peering; but I dare not say
How near the tidings of our comfort is.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.

LORD ROSS:
Be confident to speak, Northumberland:
We three are but thyself; and, speaking so,
Thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Then thus: I have from Port le Blanc, a bay
In Brittany, received intelligence
That Harry Duke of Hereford, Rainold Lord Cobham,
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
His brother, Archbishop late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas Erpingham, Sir John Ramston,
Sir John Norbery, Sir Robert Waterton and Francis Quoint,
All these well furnish'd by the Duke of Bretagne
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war,
Are making hither with all due expedience
And shortly mean to touch our northern shore:
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
The first departing of the king for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Imp out our drooping country's broken wing,
Redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre's gilt
And make high majesty look like itself,
Away with me in post to Ravenspurgh;
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay and be secret, and myself will go.

LORD ROSS:
To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.

BUSHY:
Madam, your majesty is too much sad:
You promised, when you parted with the king,
To lay aside life-harming heaviness
And entertain a cheerful disposition.

QUEEN:
To please the king I did; to please myself
I cannot do it; yet I know no cause
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
As my sweet Richard: yet again, methinks,
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortune's womb,
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
With nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves,
More than with parting from my lord the king.

BUSHY:
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows,
Which shows like grief itself, but is not so;
For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire to many objects;
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry
Distinguish form: so your sweet majesty,
Looking awry upon your lord's departure,
Find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail;
Which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows
Of what it is not. Then, thrice-gracious queen,
More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen;
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye,
Which for things true weeps things imaginary.

QUEEN:
It may be so; but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be,
I cannot but be sad; so heavy sad
As, though on thinking on no thought I think,
Makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.

BUSHY:
'Tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.

QUEEN:
'Tis nothing less: conceit is still derived
From some forefather grief; mine is not so,
For nothing had begot my something grief;
Or something hath the nothing that I grieve:
'Tis in reversion that I do possess;
But what it is, that is not yet known; what
I cannot name; 'tis nameless woe, I wot.

GREEN:
God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen:
I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.

QUEEN:
Why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is;
For his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd?

GREEN:
That he, our hope, might have retired his power,
And driven into despair an enemy's hope,
Who strongly hath set footing in this land:
The banish'd Bolingbroke repeals himself,
And with uplifted arms is safe arrived
At Ravenspurgh.

QUEEN:
Now God in heaven forbid!

GREEN:
Ah, madam, 'tis too true: and that is worse,
The Lord Northumberland, his son young Henry Percy,
The Lords of Ross, Beaumond, and Willoughby,
With all their powerful friends, are fled to him.

BUSHY:
Why have you not proclaim'd Northumberland
And all the rest revolted faction traitors?

GREEN:
We have: whereupon the Earl of Worcester
Hath broke his staff, resign'd his stewardship,
And all the household servants fled with him
To Bolingbroke.

QUEEN:
So, Green, thou art the midwife to my woe,
And Bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir:
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
And I, a gasping new-deliver'd mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.

BUSHY:
Despair not, madam.

QUEEN:
Who shall hinder me?
I will despair, and be at enmity
With cozening hope: he is a flatterer,
A parasite, a keeper back of death,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Which false hope lingers in extremity.

GREEN:
Here comes the Duke of York.

QUEEN:
With signs of war about his aged neck:
O, full of careful business are his looks!
Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.

DUKE OF YORK:
Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts:
Comfort's in heaven; and we are on the earth,
Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.
Your husband, he is gone to save far off,
Whilst others come to make him lose at home:
Here am I left to underprop his land,
Who, weak with age, cannot support myself:
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made;
Now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.

Servant:
My lord, your son was gone before I came.

DUKE OF YORK:
He was? Why, so! go all which way it will!
The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold,
And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.
Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester;
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound:
Hold, take my ring.

Servant:
My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship,
To-day, as I came by, I called there;
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

DUKE OF YORK:
What is't, knave?

Servant:
An hour before I came, the duchess died.

DUKE OF YORK:
God for his mercy! what a tide of woes
Comes rushing on this woeful land at once!
I know not what to do: I would to God,
So my untruth had not provoked him to it,
The king had cut off my head with my brother's.
What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come, sister,--cousin, I would say--pray, pardon me.
Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts
And bring away the armour that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go muster men?
If I know how or which way to order these affairs
Thus thrust disorderly into my hands,
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen:
The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath
And duty bids defend; the other again
Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd,
Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.
Well, somewhat we must do. Come, cousin, I'll
Dispose of you.
Gentlemen, go, muster up your men,
And meet me presently at Berkeley.
I should to Plashy too;
But time will not permit: all is uneven,
And every thing is left at six and seven.

BUSHY:
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
But none returns. For us to levy power
Proportionable to the enemy
Is all unpossible.

GREEN:
Besides, our nearness to the king in love
Is near the hate of those love not the king.

BAGOT:
And that's the wavering commons: for their love
Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

BUSHY:
Wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.

BAGOT:
If judgement lie in them, then so do we,
Because we ever have been near the king.

GREEN:
Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle:
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

BUSHY:
Thither will I with you; for little office
The hateful commons will perform for us,
Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.
Will you go along with us?

BAGOT:
No; I will to Ireland to his majesty.
Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain,
We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.

BUSHY:
That's as York thrives to beat back Bolingbroke.

GREEN:
Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes
Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry:
Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.

BUSHY:
Well, we may meet again.

BAGOT:
I fear me, never.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
How far is it, my lord, to Berkeley now?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Believe me, noble lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire:
These high wild hills and rough uneven ways
Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome,
And yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable.
But I bethink me what a weary way
From Ravenspurgh to Cotswold will be found
In Ross and Willoughby, wanting your company,
Which, I protest, hath very much beguiled
The tediousness and process of my travel:
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit which I possess;
And hope to joy is little less in joy
Than hope enjoy'd: by this the weary lords
Shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done
By sight of what I have, your noble company.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Of much less value is my company
Than your good words. But who comes here?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
It is my son, young Harry Percy,
Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.
Harry, how fares your uncle?

HENRY PERCY:
I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Why, is he not with the queen?

HENRY PERCY:
No, my good Lord; he hath forsook the court,
Broken his staff of office and dispersed
The household of the king.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
What was his reason?
He was not so resolved when last we spake together.

HENRY PERCY:
Because your lordship was proclaimed traitor.
But he, my lord, is gone to Ravenspurgh,
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Berkeley, to discover
What power the Duke of York had levied there;
Then with directions to repair to Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy?

HENRY PERCY:
No, my good lord, for that is not forgot
Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Then learn to know him now; this is the duke.

HENRY PERCY:
My gracious lord, I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being tender, raw and young:
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service and desert.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I thank thee, gentle Percy; and be sure
I count myself in nothing else so happy
As in a soul remembering my good friends;
And, as my fortune ripens with thy love,
It shall be still thy true love's recompense:
My heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
How far is it to Berkeley? and what stir
Keeps good old York there with his men of war?

HENRY PERCY:
There stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees,
Mann'd with three hundred men, as I have heard;
And in it are the Lords of York, Berkeley, and Seymour;
None else of name and noble estimate.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby,
Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Welcome, my lords. I wot your love pursues
A banish'd traitor: all my treasury
Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd
Shall be your love and labour's recompense.

LORD ROSS:
Your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
And far surmounts our labour to attain it.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor;
Which, till my infant fortune comes to years,
Stands for my bounty. But who comes here?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.

LORD BERKELEY:
My Lord of Hereford, my message is to you.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My lord, my answer is--to Lancaster;
And I am come to seek that name in England;
And I must find that title in your tongue,
Before I make reply to aught you say.

LORD BERKELEY:
Mistake me not, my lord; 'tis not my meaning
To raze one title of your honour out:
To you, my lord, I come, what lord you will,
From the most gracious regent of this land,
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
To take advantage of the absent time
And fright our native peace with self-born arms.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I shall not need transport my words by you;
Here comes his grace in person. My noble uncle!

DUKE OF YORK:
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
Whose duty is deceiveable and false.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious uncle--

DUKE OF YORK:
Tut, tut!
Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle:
I am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace.'
In an ungracious mouth is but profane.
Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs
Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?
But then more 'why?' why have they dared to march
So many miles upon her peaceful bosom,
Frighting her pale-faced villages with war
And ostentation of despised arms?
Comest thou because the anointed king is hence?
Why, foolish boy, the king is left behind,
And in my loyal bosom lies his power.
Were I but now the lord of such hot youth
As when brave Gaunt, thy father, and myself
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
From forth the ranks of many thousand French,
O, then how quickly should this arm of mine.
Now prisoner to the palsy, chastise thee
And minister correction to thy fault!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious uncle, let me know my fault:
On what condition stands it and wherein?

DUKE OF YORK:
Even in condition of the worst degree,
In gross rebellion and detested treason:
Thou art a banish'd man, and here art come
Before the expiration of thy time,
In braving arms against thy sovereign.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford;
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And, noble uncle, I beseech your grace
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye:
You are my father, for methinks in you
I see old Gaunt alive; O, then, my father,
Will you permit that I shall stand condemn'd
A wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties
Pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away
To upstart unthrifts? Wherefore was I born?
If that my cousin king be King of England,
It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster.
You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin;
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father,
To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.
I am denied to sue my livery here,
And yet my letters-patents give me leave:
My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold,
And these and all are all amiss employ'd.
What would you have me do? I am a subject,
And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me;
And therefore, personally I lay my claim
To my inheritance of free descent.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The noble duke hath been too much abused.

LORD ROSS:
It stands your grace upon to do him right.

LORD WILLOUGHBY:
Base men by his endowments are made great.

DUKE OF YORK:
My lords of England, let me tell you this:
I have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs
And laboured all I could to do him right;
But in this kind to come, in braving arms,
Be his own carver and cut out his way,
To find out right with wrong, it may not be;
And you that do abet him in this kind
Cherish rebellion and are rebels all.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The noble duke hath sworn his coming is
But for his own; and for the right of that
We all have strongly sworn to give him aid;
And let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!

DUKE OF YORK:
Well, well, I see the issue of these arms:
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
Because my power is weak and all ill left:
But if I could, by Him that gave me life,
I would attach you all and make you stoop
Unto the sovereign mercy of the king;
But since I cannot, be it known to you
I do remain as neuter. So, fare you well;
Unless you please to enter in the castle
And there repose you for this night.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
An offer, uncle, that we will accept:
But we must win your grace to go with us
To Bristol castle, which they say is held
By Bushy, Bagot and their complices,
The caterpillars of the commonwealth,
Which I have sworn to weed and pluck away.

DUKE OF YORK:
It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause;
For I am loath to break our country's laws.
Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are:
Things past redress are now with me past care.

Captain:
My lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days,
And hardly kept our countrymen together,
And yet we hear no tidings from the king;
Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman:
The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.

Captain:
'Tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay.
The bay-trees in our country are all wither'd
And meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven;
The pale-faced moon looks bloody on the earth
And lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change;
Rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap,
The one in fear to lose what they enjoy,
The other to enjoy by rage and war:
These signs forerun the death or fall of kings.
Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled,
As well assured Richard their king is dead.

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind
I see thy glory like a shooting star
Fall to the base earth from the firmament.
Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west,
Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest:
Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes,
And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Bring forth these men.
Bushy and Green, I will not vex your souls--
Since presently your souls must part your bodies--
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
For 'twere no charity; yet, to wash your blood
From off my hands, here in the view of men
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
You have misled a prince, a royal king,
A happy gentleman in blood and lineaments,
By you unhappied and disfigured clean:
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Made a divorce betwixt his queen and him,
Broke the possession of a royal bed
And stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks
With tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs.
Myself, a prince by fortune of my birth,
Near to the king in blood, and near in love
Till you did make him misinterpret me,
Have stoop'd my neck under your injuries,
And sigh'd my English breath in foreign clouds,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment;
Whilst you have fed upon my signories,
Dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods,
From my own windows torn my household coat,
Razed out my imprese, leaving me no sign,
Save men's opinions and my living blood,
To show the world I am a gentleman.
This and much more, much more than twice all this,
Condemns you to the death. See them deliver'd over
To execution and the hand of death.

BUSHY:
More welcome is the stroke of death to me
Than Bolingbroke to England. Lords, farewell.

GREEN:
My comfort is that heaven will take our souls
And plague injustice with the pains of hell.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
Uncle, you say the queen is at your house;
For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated:
Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.

DUKE OF YORK:
A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd
With letters of your love to her at large.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Thank, gentle uncle. Come, lords, away.
To fight with Glendower and his complices:
Awhile to work, and after holiday.

KING RICHARD II:
Barkloughly castle call they this at hand?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Yea, my lord. How brooks your grace the air,
After your late tossing on the breaking seas?

KING RICHARD II:
Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy
To stand upon my kingdom once again.
Dear earth, I do salute thee with my hand,
Though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs:
As a long-parted mother with her child
Plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting,
So, weeping, smiling, greet I thee, my earth,
And do thee favours with my royal hands.
Feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth,
Nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense;
But let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom,
And heavy-gaited toads lie in their way,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet
Which with usurping steps do trample thee:
Yield stinging nettles to mine enemies;
And when they from thy bosom pluck a flower,
Guard it, I pray thee, with a lurking adder
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
Throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies.
Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords:
This earth shall have a feeling and these stones
Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king
Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king
Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.
The means that heaven yields must be embraced,
And not neglected; else, if heaven would,
And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse,
The proffer'd means of succor and redress.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
He means, my lord, that we are too remiss;
Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security,
Grows strong and great in substance and in power.

KING RICHARD II:
Discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not
That when the searching eye of heaven is hid,
Behind the globe, that lights the lower world,
Then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen
In murders and in outrage, boldly here;
But when from under this terrestrial ball
He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines
And darts his light through every guilty hole,
Then murders, treasons and detested sins,
The cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs,
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves?
So when this thief, this traitor, Bolingbroke,
Who all this while hath revell'd in the night
Whilst we were wandering with the antipodes,
Shall see us rising in our throne, the east,
His treasons will sit blushing in his face,
Not able to endure the sight of day,
But self-affrighted tremble at his sin.
Not all the water in the rough rude sea
Can wash the balm off from an anointed king;
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
The deputy elected by the Lord:
For every man that Bolingbroke hath press'd
To lift shrewd steel against our golden crown,
God for his Richard hath in heavenly pay
A glorious angel: then, if angels fight,
Weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
Welcome, my lord how far off lies your power?

EARL OF SALISBURY:
Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord,
Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue
And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
One day too late, I fear me, noble lord,
Hath clouded all thy happy days on earth:
O, call back yesterday, bid time return,
And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men!
To-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late,
O'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state:
For all the Welshmen, hearing thou wert dead.
Are gone to Bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?

KING RICHARD II:
But now the blood of twenty thousand men
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled;
And, till so much blood thither come again,
Have I not reason to look pale and dead?
All souls that will be safe fly from my side,
For time hath set a blot upon my pride.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Comfort, my liege; remember who you are.

KING RICHARD II:
I had forgot myself; am I not king?
Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.
Is not the king's name twenty thousand names?
Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes
At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
Ye favourites of a king: are we not high?
High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York
Hath power enough to serve our turn. But who comes here?

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
More health and happiness betide my liege
Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!

KING RICHARD II:
Mine ear is open and my heart prepared;
The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.
Say, is my kingdom lost? why, 'twas my care
And what loss is it to be rid of care?
Strives Bolingbroke to be as great as we?
Greater he shall not be; if he serve God,
We'll serve Him too and be his fellow so:
Revolt our subjects? that we cannot mend;
They break their faith to God as well as us:
Cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay:
The worst is death, and death will have his day.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd
To bear the tidings of calamity.
Like an unseasonable stormy day,
Which makes the silver rivers drown their shores,
As if the world were all dissolved to tears,
So high above his limits swells the rage
Of Bolingbroke, covering your fearful land
With hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel.
White-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps
Against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices,
Strive to speak big and clap their female joints
In stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown:
The very beadsmen learn to bend their bows
Of double-fatal yew against thy state;
Yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills
Against thy seat: both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse than I have power to tell.

KING RICHARD II:
Too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill.
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushy? where is Green?
That they have let the dangerous enemy
Measure our confines with such peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it:
I warrant they have made peace with Bolingbroke.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.

KING RICHARD II:
O villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption!
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man!
Snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart!
Three Judases, each one thrice worse than Judas!
Would they make peace? terrible hell make war
Upon their spotted souls for this offence!

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Sweet love, I see, changing his property,
Turns to the sourest and most deadly hate:
Again uncurse their souls; their peace is made
With heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse
Have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
And lie full low, graved in the hollow ground.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Where is the duke my father with his power?

KING RICHARD II:
No matter where; of comfort no man speak:
Let's talk of graves, of worms, and epitaphs;
Make dust our paper and with rainy eyes
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,
Let's choose executors and talk of wills:
And yet not so, for what can we bequeath
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our lands, our lives and all are Bolingbroke's,
And nothing can we call our own but death
And that small model of the barren earth
Which serves as paste and cover to our bones.
For God's sake, let us sit upon the ground
And tell sad stories of the death of kings;
How some have been deposed; some slain in war,
Some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed;
Some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd;
All murder'd: for within the hollow crown
That rounds the mortal temples of a king
Keeps Death his court and there the antic sits,
Scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp,
Allowing him a breath, a little scene,
To monarchize, be fear'd and kill with looks,
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this flesh which walls about our life,
Were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus
Comes at the last and with a little pin
Bores through his castle wall, and farewell king!
Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood
With solemn reverence: throw away respect,
Tradition, form and ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while:
I live with bread like you, feel want,
Taste grief, need friends: subjected thus,
How can you say to me, I am a king?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
My lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes,
But presently prevent the ways to wail.
To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength,
Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe,
And so your follies fight against yourself.
Fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight:
And fight and die is death destroying death;
Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My father hath a power; inquire of him
And learn to make a body of a limb.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come
To change blows with thee for our day of doom.
This ague fit of fear is over-blown;
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.

SIR STEPHEN SCROOP:
Men judge by the complexion of the sky
The state and inclination of the day:
So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
I play the torturer, by small and small
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
Your uncle York is join'd with Bolingbroke,
And all your northern castles yielded up,
And all your southern gentlemen in arms
Upon his party.

KING RICHARD II:
Thou hast said enough.
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
Of that sweet way I was in to despair!
What say you now? what comfort have we now?
By heaven, I'll hate him everlastingly
That bids me be of comfort any more.
Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away;
A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.
That power I have, discharge; and let them go
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
For I have none: let no man speak again
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My liege, one word.

KING RICHARD II:
He does me double wrong
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed
With some few private friends upon this coast.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The news is very fair and good, my lord:
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.

DUKE OF YORK:
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
To say 'King Richard:' alack the heavy day
When such a sacred king should hide his head.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Your grace mistakes; only to be brief
Left I his title out.

DUKE OF YORK:
The time hath been,
Would you have been so brief with him, he would
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
For taking so the head, your whole head's length.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.

DUKE OF YORK:
Take not, good cousin, further than you should.
Lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself
Against their will. But who comes here?
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?

HENRY PERCY:
The castle royally is mann'd, my lord,
Against thy entrance.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Royally!
Why, it contains no king?

HENRY PERCY:
Yes, my good lord,
It doth contain a king; King Richard lies
Within the limits of yon lime and stone:
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Noble lords,
Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
Into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bolingbroke
On both his knees doth kiss King Richard's hand
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
To his most royal person, hither come
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
Provided that my banishment repeal'd
And lands restored again be freely granted:
If not, I'll use the advantage of my power
And lay the summer's dust with showers of blood
Rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd Englishmen:
The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench
The fresh green lap of fair King Richard's land,
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go, signify as much, while here we march
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
Let's march without the noise of threatening drum,
That from this castle's tatter'd battlements
Our fair appointments may be well perused.
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
With no less terror than the elements
Of fire and water, when their thundering shock
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water:
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
My waters; on the earth, and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,
As doth the blushing discontented sun
From out the fiery portal of the east,
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
To dim his glory and to stain the track
Of his bright passage to the occident.

DUKE OF YORK:
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,
As bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth
Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe,
That any harm should stain so fair a show!

KING RICHARD II:
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the hand of God
That hath dismissed us from our stewardship;
For well we know, no hand of blood and bone
Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think that all, as you have done,
Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
And we are barren and bereft of friends;
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike
Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
That lift your vassal hands against my head
And threat the glory of my precious crown.
Tell Bolingbroke--for yond methinks he stands--
That every stride he makes upon my land
Is dangerous treason: he is come to open
The purple testament of bleeding war;
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons
Shall ill become the flower of England's face,
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
To scarlet indignation and bedew
Her pastures' grass with faithful English blood.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king
Should so with civil and uncivil arms
Be rush'd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin
Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;
And by the honourable tomb he swears,
That stands upon your royal grandsire's bones,
And by the royalties of both your bloods,
Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
And by the worth and honour of himself,
Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
His coming hither hath no further scope
Than for his lineal royalties and to beg
Enfranchisement immediate on his knees:
Which on thy royal party granted once,
His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your majesty.
This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;
And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.

KING RICHARD II:
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:
His noble cousin is right welcome hither;
And all the number of his fair demands
Shall be accomplish'd without contradiction:
With all the gracious utterance thou hast
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,
To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
Defiance to the traitor, and so die?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
No, good my lord; let's fight with gentle words
Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.

KING RICHARD II:
O God, O God! that e'er this tongue of mine,
That laid the sentence of dread banishment
On yon proud man, should take it off again
With words of sooth! O that I were as great
As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
Or that I could forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now!
Swell'st thou, proud heart? I'll give thee scope to beat,
Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II:
What must the king do now? must he submit?
The king shall do it: must he be deposed?
The king shall be contented: must he lose
The name of king? o' God's name, let it go:
I'll give my jewels for a set of beads,
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
My gay apparel for an almsman's gown,
My figured goblets for a dish of wood,
My sceptre for a palmer's walking staff,
My subjects for a pair of carved saints
And my large kingdom for a little grave,
A little little grave, an obscure grave;
Or I'll be buried in the king's highway,
Some way of common trade, where subjects' feet
May hourly trample on their sovereign's head;
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;
And buried once, why not upon my head?
Aumerle, thou weep'st, my tender-hearted cousin!
We'll make foul weather with despised tears;
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,
And make a dearth in this revolting land.
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,
And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
As thus, to drop them still upon one place,
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
Within the earth; and, therein laid,--there lies
Two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes.
Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty
Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, in the base court he doth attend
To speak with you; may it please you to come down.

KING RICHARD II:
Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,
Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.
In the base court? Come down? Down, court!
down, king!
For night-owls shriek where mounting larks
should sing.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What says his majesty?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Sorrow and grief of heart
Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man
Yet he is come.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Stand all apart,
And show fair duty to his majesty.
My gracious lord,--

KING RICHARD II:
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
To make the base earth proud with kissing it:
Me rather had my heart might feel your love
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,
Thus high at least, although your knee be low.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.

KING RICHARD II:
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.

KING RICHARD II:
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,
That know the strong'st and surest way to get.
Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;
Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
Though you are old enough to be my heir.
What you will have, I'll give, and willing too;
For do we must what force will have us do.
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Yea, my good lord.

KING RICHARD II:
Then I must not say no.

QUEEN:
What sport shall we devise here in this garden,
To drive away the heavy thought of care?

Lady:
Madam, we'll play at bowls.

QUEEN:
'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
And that my fortune rubs against the bias.

Lady:
Madam, we'll dance.

QUEEN:
My legs can keep no measure in delight,
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:
Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.

Lady:
Madam, we'll tell tales.

QUEEN:
Of sorrow or of joy?

Lady:
Of either, madam.

QUEEN:
Of neither, girl:
For of joy, being altogether wanting,
It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
Or if of grief, being altogether had,
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:
For what I have I need not to repeat;
And what I want it boots not to complain.

Lady:
Madam, I'll sing.

QUEEN:
'Tis well that thou hast cause
But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.

Lady:
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.

QUEEN:
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
And never borrow any tear of thee.
But stay, here come the gardeners:
Let's step into the shadow of these trees.
My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
They'll talk of state; for every one doth so
Against a change; woe is forerun with woe.

Gardener:
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
Which, like unruly children, make their sire
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
Go thou, and like an executioner,
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,
That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
All must be even in our government.
You thus employ'd, I will go root away
The noisome weeds, which without profit suck
The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.

Servant:
Why should we in the compass of a pale
Keep law and form and due proportion,
Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,
Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd,
Her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs
Swarming with caterpillars?

Gardener:
Hold thy peace:
He that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:
The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,
That seem'd in eating him to hold him up,
Are pluck'd up root and all by Bolingbroke,
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.

Servant:
What, are they dead?

Gardener:
They are; and Bolingbroke
Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it
That he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land
As we this garden! We at time of year
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,
Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,
With too much riches it confound itself:
Had he done so to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear and he to taste
Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.

Servant:
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?

Gardener:
Depress'd he is already, and deposed
'Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night
To a dear friend of the good Duke of York's,
That tell black tidings.

QUEEN:
O, I am press'd to death through want of speaking!
Thou, old Adam's likeness, set to dress this garden,
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?
Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,
Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,
Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.

Gardener:
Pardon me, madam: little joy have I
To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd:
In your lord's scale is nothing but himself,
And some few vanities that make him light;
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
Besides himself, are all the English peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
Post you to London, and you will find it so;
I speak no more than every one doth know.

QUEEN:
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st
To serve me last, that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go,
To meet at London London's king in woe.
What, was I born to this, that my sad look
Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,
Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.

GARDENER:
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse.
Here did she fall a tear; here in this place
I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
In the remembrance of a weeping queen.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Call forth Bagot.
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind;
What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death,
Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd
The bloody office of his timeless end.

BAGOT:
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.

BAGOT:
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.
In that dead time when Gloucester's death was plotted,
I heard you say, 'Is not my arm of length,
That reacheth from the restful English court
As far as Calais, to mine uncle's head?'
Amongst much other talk, that very time,
I heard you say that you had rather refuse
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
Than Bolingbroke's return to England;
Adding withal how blest this land would be
In this your cousin's death.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Princes and noble lords,
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,
On equal terms to give him chastisement?
Either I must, or have mine honour soil'd
With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
There is my gage, the manual seal of death,
That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest,
And will maintain what thou hast said is false
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my knightly sword.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence that hath moved me so.

LORD FITZWATER:
If that thy valour stand on sympathy,
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:
By that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st,
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucester's death.
If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest;
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.

LORD FITZWATER:
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.

HENRY PERCY:
Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true
In this appeal as thou art all unjust;
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
To prove it on thee to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
An if I do not, may my hands rot off
And never brandish more revengeful steel
Over the glittering helmet of my foe!

Lord:
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;
And spur thee on with full as many lies
As may be holloa'd in thy treacherous ear
From sun to sun: there is my honour's pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Who sets me else? by heaven, I'll throw at all:
I have a thousand spirits in one breast,
To answer twenty thousand such as you.

DUKE OF SURREY:
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
The very time Aumerle and you did talk.

LORD FITZWATER:
'Tis very true: you were in presence then;
And you can witness with me this is true.

DUKE OF SURREY:
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.

LORD FITZWATER:
Surrey, thou liest.

DUKE OF SURREY:
Dishonourable boy!
That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,
That it shall render vengeance and revenge
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie
In earth as quiet as thy father's skull:
In proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.

LORD FITZWATER:
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,
And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,
And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith,
To tie thee to my strong correction.
As I intend to thrive in this new world,
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:
Besides, I heard the banish'd Norfolk say
That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
To execute the noble duke at Calais.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this,
If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
These differences shall all rest under gage
Till Norfolk be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be,
And, though mine enemy, restored again
To all his lands and signories: when he's return'd,
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.
Many a time hath banish'd Norfolk fought
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens:
And toil'd with works of war, retired himself
To Italy; and there at Venice gave
His body to that pleasant country's earth,
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,
Under whose colours he had fought so long.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
As surely as I live, my lord.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
Your differences shall all rest under gage
Till we assign you to your days of trial.

DUKE OF YORK:
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From plume-pluck'd Richard; who with willing soul
Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields
To the possession of thy royal hand:
Ascend his throne, descending now from him;
And long live Henry, fourth of that name!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
In God's name, I'll ascend the regal throne.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
Marry. God forbid!
Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God that any in this noble presence
Were enough noble to be upright judge
Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
What subject can give sentence on his king?
And who sits here that is not Richard's subject?
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
And shall the figure of God's majesty,
His captain, steward, deputy-elect,
Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,
That in a Christian climate souls refined
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
Stirr'd up by God, thus boldly for his king:
My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king:
And if you crown him, let me prophesy:
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
And future ages groan for this foul act;
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;
Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny
Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd
The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.
O, if you raise this house against this house,
It will the woefullest division prove
That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,
Of capital treason we arrest you here.
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge
To keep him safely till his day of trial.
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
He may surrender; so we shall proceed
Without suspicion.

DUKE OF YORK:
I will be his conduct.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
Little are we beholding to your love,
And little look'd for at your helping hands.

KING RICHARD II:
Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
Wherewith I reign'd? I hardly yet have learn'd
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
To this submission. Yet I well remember
The favours of these men: were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me?
So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,
Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none.
God save the king! Will no man say amen?
Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.
God save the king! although I be not he;
And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
To do what service am I sent for hither?

DUKE OF YORK:
To do that office of thine own good will
Which tired majesty did make thee offer,
The resignation of thy state and crown
To Henry Bolingbroke.

KING RICHARD II:
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;
Here cousin:
On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well
That owes two buckets, filling one another,
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
The other down, unseen and full of water:
That bucket down and full of tears am I,
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I thought you had been willing to resign.

KING RICHARD II:
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:
You may my glories and my state depose,
But not my griefs; still am I king of those.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.

KING RICHARD II:
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
My care is loss of care, by old care done;
Your care is gain of care, by new care won:
The cares I give I have, though given away;
They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Are you contented to resign the crown?

KING RICHARD II:
Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;
Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
Now mark me, how I will undo myself;
I give this heavy weight from off my head
And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;
With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
With mine own hands I give away my crown,
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
With mine own breath release all duty's rites:
All pomp and majesty I do forswear;
My manors, rents, revenues I forego;
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!
Long mayst thou live in Richard's seat to sit,
And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!
God save King Harry, unking'd Richard says,
And send him many years of sunshine days!
What more remains?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
No more, but that you read
These accusations and these grievous crimes
Committed by your person and your followers
Against the state and profit of this land;
That, by confessing them, the souls of men
May deem that you are worthily deposed.

KING RICHARD II:
Must I do so? and must I ravel out
My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland,
If thy offences were upon record,
Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
There shouldst thou find one heinous article,
Containing the deposing of a king
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
Mark'd with a blot, damn'd in the book of heaven:
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands
Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates
Have here deliver'd me to my sour cross,
And water cannot wash away your sin.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.

KING RICHARD II:
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:
And yet salt water blinds them not so much
But they can see a sort of traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
I find myself a traitor with the rest;
For I have given here my soul's consent
To undeck the pompous body of a king;
Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,
Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord,--

KING RICHARD II:
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
Nor no man's lord; I have no name, no title,
No, not that name was given me at the font,
But 'tis usurp'd: alack the heavy day,
That I have worn so many winters out,
And know not now what name to call myself!
O that I were a mockery king of snow,
Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
To melt myself away in water-drops!
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
An if my word be sterling yet in England,
Let it command a mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a face I have,
Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.

KING RICHARD II:
Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
The commons will not then be satisfied.

KING RICHARD II:
They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough,
When I do see the very book indeed
Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
Give me the glass, and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck
So many blows upon this face of mine,
And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
That every day under his household roof
Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face
That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
Was this the face that faced so many follies,
And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?
A brittle glory shineth in this face:
As brittle as the glory is the face;
For there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers.
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,
How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd
The shadow or your face.

KING RICHARD II:
Say that again.
The shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see:
'Tis very true, my grief lies all within;
And these external manners of laments
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
That swells with silence in the tortured soul;
There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king,
For thy great bounty, that not only givest
Me cause to wail but teachest me the way
How to lament the cause. I'll beg one boon,
And then be gone and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Name it, fair cousin.

KING RICHARD II:
'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king:
For when I was a king, my flatterers
Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
I have a king here to my flatterer.
Being so great, I have no need to beg.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Yet ask.

KING RICHARD II:
And shall I have?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
You shall.

KING RICHARD II:
Then give me leave to go.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Whither?

KING RICHARD II:
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.

KING RICHARD II:
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,
That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.

Abbot:
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.

BISHOP OF CARLISLE:
The woe's to come; the children yet unborn.
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
You holy clergymen, is there no plot
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?

Abbot:
My lord,
Before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the sacrament
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
Whatever I shall happen to devise.
I see your brows are full of discontent,
Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:
Come home with me to supper; and I'll lay
A plot shall show us all a merry day.

QUEEN:
This way the king will come; this is the way
To Julius Caesar's ill-erected tower,
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
Is doom'd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke:
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
Have any resting for her true king's queen.
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
Thou map of honour, thou King Richard's tomb,
And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,
Why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,
When triumph is become an alehouse guest?

KING RICHARD II:
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul,
To think our former state a happy dream;
From which awaked, the truth of what we are
Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
To grim Necessity, and he and I
Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France
And cloister thee in some religious house:
Our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
Which our profane hours here have stricken down.

QUEEN:
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transform'd and weaken'd? hath Bolingbroke deposed
Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be o'erpower'd; and wilt thou, pupil-like,
Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,
And fawn on rage with base humility,
Which art a lion and a king of beasts?

KING RICHARD II:
A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,
I had been still a happy king of men.
Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.
In winter's tedious nights sit by the fire
With good old folks and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages long ago betid;
And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me
And send the hearers weeping to their beds:
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue
And in compassion weep the fire out;
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
For the deposing of a rightful king.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
And, madam, there is order ta'en for you;
With all swift speed you must away to France.

KING RICHARD II:
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age
More than it is ere foul sin gathering head
Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think,
Though he divide the realm and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to all;
And he shall think that thou, which know'st the way
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
Being ne'er so little urged, another way
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
The love of wicked men converts to fear;
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
To worthy danger and deserved death.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.

KING RICHARD II:
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me,
And then betwixt me and my married wife.
Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me;
And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.
Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,
Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
She came adorned hither like sweet May,
Sent back like Hallowmas or short'st of day.

QUEEN:
And must we be divided? must we part?

KING RICHARD II:
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.

QUEEN:
Banish us both and send the king with me.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
That were some love but little policy.

QUEEN:
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.

KING RICHARD II:
So two, together weeping, make one woe.
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.
Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.

QUEEN:
So longest way shall have the longest moans.

KING RICHARD II:
Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short,
And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief,
Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief;
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

QUEEN:
Give me mine own again; 'twere no good part
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
That I might strive to kill it with a groan.

KING RICHARD II:
We make woe wanton with this fond delay:
Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off,
of our two cousins coming into London.

DUKE OF YORK:
Where did I leave?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
At that sad stop, my lord,
Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.

DUKE OF YORK:
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed
Which his aspiring rider seem'd to know,
With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
Whilst all tongues cried 'God save thee,
Bolingbroke!'
You would have thought the very windows spake,
So many greedy looks of young and old
Through casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage, and that all the walls
With painted imagery had said at once
'Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!'
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
Bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck,
Bespake them thus: 'I thank you, countrymen:'
And thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?

DUKE OF YORK:
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried 'God save him!'
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience,
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steel'd
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted
And barbarism itself have pitied him.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
Whose state and honour I for aye allow.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Here comes my son Aumerle.

DUKE OF YORK:
Aumerle that was;
But that is lost for being Richard's friend,
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I am in parliament pledge for his truth
And lasting fealty to the new-made king.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Welcome, my son: who are the violets now
That strew the green lap of the new come spring?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:
God knows I had as lief be none as one.

DUKE OF YORK:
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
For aught I know, my lord, they do.

DUKE OF YORK:
You will be there, I know.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
If God prevent not, I purpose so.

DUKE OF YORK:
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
My lord, 'tis nothing.

DUKE OF YORK:
No matter, then, who see it;
I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I do beseech your grace to pardon me:
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

DUKE OF YORK:
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
I fear, I fear,--

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What should you fear?
'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into
For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.

DUKE OF YORK:
Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, let me see the writing.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.

DUKE OF YORK:
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is the matter, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK:
Ho! who is within there?
Saddle my horse.
God for his mercy, what treachery is here!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, what is it, my lord?

DUKE OF YORK:
Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.
Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,
I will appeach the villain.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
What is the matter?

DUKE OF YORK:
Peace, foolish woman.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Good mother, be content; it is no more
Than my poor life must answer.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Thy life answer!

DUKE OF YORK:
Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.
Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.

DUKE OF YORK:
Give me my boots, I say.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Why, York, what wilt thou do?
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,
And rob me of a happy mother's name?
Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?

DUKE OF YORK:
Thou fond mad woman,
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
A dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament,
And interchangeably set down their hands,
To kill the king at Oxford.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
He shall be none;
We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?

DUKE OF YORK:
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,
I would appeach him.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Hadst thou groan'd for him
As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.
But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect
That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
And that he is a bastard, not thy son:
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:
He is as like thee as a man may be,
Not like to me, or any of my kin,
And yet I love him.

DUKE OF YORK:
Make way, unruly woman!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;
Spur post, and get before him to the king,
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
I'll not be long behind; though I be old,
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
And never will I rise up from the ground
Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. Away, be gone!

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
'Tis full three months since I did see him last;
If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.
I would to God, my lords, he might be found:
Inquire at London, 'mongst the taverns there,
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent,
With unrestrained loose companions,
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes,
And beat our watch, and rob our passengers;
Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
Takes on the point of honour to support
So dissolute a crew.

HENRY PERCY:
My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
And what said the gallant?

HENRY PERCY:
His answer was, he would unto the stews,
And from the common'st creature pluck a glove,
And wear it as a favour; and with that
He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
As dissolute as desperate; yet through both
I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Where is the king?

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What means our cousin, that he stares and looks
So wildly?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty,
To have some conference with your grace alone.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
What is the matter with our cousin now?

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth
Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Intended or committed was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
To win thy after-love I pardon thee.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Then give me leave that I may turn the key,
That no man enter till my tale be done.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Have thy desire.

DUKE OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Villain, I'll make thee safe.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.

DUKE OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What is the matter, uncle? speak;
Recover breath; tell us how near is danger,
That we may arm us to encounter it.

DUKE OF YORK:
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
The treason that my haste forbids me show.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd:
I do repent me; read not my name there
My heart is not confederate with my hand.

DUKE OF YORK:
It was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down.
I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king;
Fear, and not love, begets his penitence:
Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove
A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
O heinous, strong and bold conspiracy!
O loyal father of a treacherous son!
Thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain,
From when this stream through muddy passages
Hath held his current and defiled himself!
Thy overflow of good converts to bad,
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
This deadly blot in thy digressing son.

DUKE OF YORK:
So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd;
And he shall spend mine honour with his shame,
As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.
Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies,
Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies:
Thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath,
The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

DUCHESS OF YORK:

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
A woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis I.
Speak with me, pity me, open the door.
A beggar begs that never begg'd before.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing,
And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.'
My dangerous cousin, let your mother in:
I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.

DUKE OF YORK:
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.
This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound;
This let alone will all the rest confound.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O king, believe not this hard-hearted man!
Love loving not itself none other can.

DUKE OF YORK:
Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here?
Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Sweet York, be patient. Hear me, gentle liege.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Rise up, good aunt.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Not yet, I thee beseech:
For ever will I walk upon my knees,
And never see day that the happy sees,
Till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy,
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.

DUKE OF AUMERLE:
Unto my mother's prayers I bend my knee.

DUKE OF YORK:
Against them both my true joints bended be.
Ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face;
His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest;
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast:
He prays but faintly and would be denied;
We pray with heart and soul and all beside:
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know;
Our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow:
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy;
Ours of true zeal and deep integrity.
Our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have
That mercy which true prayer ought to have.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Nay, do not say, 'stand up;'
Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.'
And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach,
'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.
I never long'd to hear a word till now;
Say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how:
The word is short, but not so short as sweet;
No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.

DUKE OF YORK:
Speak it in French, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy?
Ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord,
That set'st the word itself against the word!
Speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land;
The chopping French we do not understand.
Thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there;
Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear;
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce,
Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Good aunt, stand up.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
I do not sue to stand;
Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
I pardon him, as God shall pardon me.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee!
Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again;
Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain,
But makes one pardon strong.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
With all my heart
I pardon him.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
A god on earth thou art.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot,
With all the rest of that consorted crew,
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.
Good uncle, help to order several powers
To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are:
They shall not live within this world, I swear,
But I will have them, if I once know where.
Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu:
Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.

DUCHESS OF YORK:
Come, my old son: I pray God make thee new.

EXTON:
Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake,
'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?'
Was it not so?

Servant:
These were his very words.

EXTON:
'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice,
And urged it twice together, did he not?

Servant:
He did.

EXTON:
And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me,
And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man'
That would divorce this terror from my heart;'
Meaning the king at Pomfret. Come, let's go:
I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.

KING RICHARD II:
I have been studying how I may compare
This prison where I live unto the world:
And for because the world is populous
And here is not a creature but myself,
I cannot do it; yet I'll hammer it out.
My brain I'll prove the female to my soul,
My soul the father; and these two beget
A generation of still-breeding thoughts,
And these same thoughts people this little world,
In humours like the people of this world,
For no thought is contented. The better sort,
As thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd
With scruples and do set the word itself
Against the word:
As thus, 'Come, little ones,' and then again,
'It is as hard to come as for a camel
To thread the postern of a small needle's eye.'
Thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot
Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails
May tear a passage through the flinty ribs
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls,
And, for they cannot, die in their own pride.
Thoughts tending to content flatter themselves
That they are not the first of fortune's slaves,
Nor shall not be the last; like silly beggars
Who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame,
That many have and others must sit there;
And in this thought they find a kind of ease,
Bearing their own misfortunes on the back
Of such as have before endured the like.
Thus play I in one person many people,
And none contented: sometimes am I king;
Then treasons make me wish myself a beggar,
And so I am: then crushing penury
Persuades me I was better when a king;
Then am I king'd again: and by and by
Think that I am unking'd by Bolingbroke,
And straight am nothing: but whate'er I be,
Nor I nor any man that but man is
With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased
With being nothing. Music do I hear?
Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is,
When time is broke and no proportion kept!
So is it in the music of men's lives.
And here have I the daintiness of ear
To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string;
But for the concord of my state and time
Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.
I wasted time, and now doth time waste me;
For now hath time made me his numbering clock:
My thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar
Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch,
Whereto my finger, like a dial's point,
Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is
Are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart,
Which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans
Show minutes, times, and hours: but my time
Runs posting on in Bolingbroke's proud joy,
While I stand fooling here, his Jack o' the clock.
This music mads me; let it sound no more;
For though it have holp madmen to their wits,
In me it seems it will make wise men mad.
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me!
For 'tis a sign of love; and love to Richard
Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.

Groom:
Hail, royal prince!

KING RICHARD II:
Thanks, noble peer;
The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.
What art thou? and how comest thou hither,
Where no man never comes but that sad dog
That brings me food to make misfortune live?

Groom:
I was a poor groom of thy stable, king,
When thou wert king; who, travelling towards York,
With much ado at length have gotten leave
To look upon my sometimes royal master's face.
O, how it yearn'd my heart when I beheld
In London streets, that coronation-day,
When Bolingbroke rode on roan Barbary,
That horse that thou so often hast bestrid,
That horse that I so carefully have dress'd!

KING RICHARD II:
Rode he on Barbary? Tell me, gentle friend,
How went he under him?

Groom:
So proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.

KING RICHARD II:
So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back!
That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand;
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble? would he not fall down,
Since pride must have a fall, and break the neck
Of that proud man that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness, horse! why do I rail on thee,
Since thou, created to be awed by man,
Wast born to bear? I was not made a horse;
And yet I bear a burthen like an ass,
Spurr'd, gall'd and tired by jouncing Bolingbroke.

Keeper:
Fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.

KING RICHARD II:
If thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.

Groom:
What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.

Keeper:
My lord, will't please you to fall to?

KING RICHARD II:
Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.

Keeper:
My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who
lately came from the king, commands the contrary.

KING RICHARD II:
The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee!
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

Keeper:
Help, help, help!

KING RICHARD II:
How now! what means death in this rude assault?
Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
Go thou, and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand
Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.
Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high;
Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.

EXTON:
As full of valour as of royal blood:
Both have I spill'd; O would the deed were good!
For now the devil, that told me I did well,
Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.
This dead king to the living king I'll bear
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Kind uncle York, the latest news we hear
Is that the rebels have consumed with fire
Our town of Cicester in Gloucestershire;
But whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
Welcome, my lord what is the news?

NORTHUMBERLAND:
First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.
The next news is, I have to London sent
The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent:
The manner of their taking may appear
At large discoursed in this paper here.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains;
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

LORD FITZWATER:
My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London
The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely,
Two of the dangerous consorted traitors
That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot;
Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.

HENRY PERCY:
The grand conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
With clog of conscience and sour melancholy
Hath yielded up his body to the grave;
But here is Carlisle living, to abide
Thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Carlisle, this is your doom:
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room,
More than thou hast, and with it joy thy life;
So as thou livest in peace, die free from strife:
For though mine enemy thou hast ever been,
High sparks of honour in thee have I seen.

EXTON:
Great king, within this coffin I present
Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies,
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
Exton, I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought
A deed of slander with thy fatal hand
Upon my head and all this famous land.

EXTON:
From your own mouth, my lord, did I this deed.

HENRY BOLINGBROKE:
They love not poison that do poison need,
Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,
I hate the murderer, love him murdered.
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
But neither my good word nor princely favour:
With Cain go wander through shades of night,
And never show thy head by day nor light.
Lords, I protest, my soul is full of woe,
That blood should sprinkle me to make me grow:
Come, mourn with me for that I do lament,
And put on sullen black incontinent:
I'll make a voyage to the Holy Land,
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand:
March sadly after; grace my mournings here;
In weeping after this untimely bier.


SAMPSON:
Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.

GREGORY:
No, for then we should be colliers.

SAMPSON:
I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

GREGORY:
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.

SAMPSON:
I strike quickly, being moved.

GREGORY:
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.

SAMPSON:
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

GREGORY:
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:
therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

SAMPSON:
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

GREGORY:
That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes
to the wall.

SAMPSON:
True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
to the wall.

GREGORY:
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

SAMPSON:
'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
maids, and cut off their heads.

GREGORY:
The heads of the maids?

SAMPSON:
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;
take it in what sense thou wilt.

GREGORY:
They must take it in sense that feel it.

SAMPSON:
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

GREGORY:
'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes
two of the house of the Montagues.

SAMPSON:
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

GREGORY:
How! turn thy back and run?

SAMPSON:
Fear me not.

GREGORY:
No, marry; I fear thee!

SAMPSON:
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.

GREGORY:
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
they list.

SAMPSON:
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;
which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.

ABRAHAM:
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON:
I do bite my thumb, sir.

ABRAHAM:
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

SAMPSON:

GREGORY:
No.

SAMPSON:
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
bite my thumb, sir.

GREGORY:
Do you quarrel, sir?

ABRAHAM:
Quarrel sir! no, sir.

SAMPSON:
If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.

ABRAHAM:
No better.

SAMPSON:
Well, sir.

GREGORY:
Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.

SAMPSON:
Yes, better, sir.

ABRAHAM:
You lie.

SAMPSON:
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.

BENVOLIO:
Part, fools!
Put up your swords; you know not what you do.

TYBALT:
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.

BENVOLIO:
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.

TYBALT:
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward!

First Citizen:
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!

CAPULET:
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!

LADY CAPULET:
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?

CAPULET:
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.

MONTAGUE:
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.

LADY MONTAGUE:
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.

PRINCE:
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time, all the rest depart away:
You Capulet; shall go along with me:
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our further pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.

MONTAGUE:
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?

BENVOLIO:
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
I drew to part them: in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the prince came, who parted either part.

LADY MONTAGUE:
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

BENVOLIO:
Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
So early walking did I see your son:
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood:
I, measuring his affections by my own,
That most are busied when they're most alone,
Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.

MONTAGUE:
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the furthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night:
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.

BENVOLIO:
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?

MONTAGUE:
I neither know it nor can learn of him.

BENVOLIO:
Have you importuned him by any means?

MONTAGUE:
Both by myself and many other friends:
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
Is to himself--I will not say how true--
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
We would as willingly give cure as know.

BENVOLIO:
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.

MONTAGUE:
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.

BENVOLIO:
Good-morrow, cousin.

ROMEO:
Is the day so young?

BENVOLIO:
But new struck nine.

ROMEO:
Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?

BENVOLIO:
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

ROMEO:
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.

BENVOLIO:
In love?

ROMEO:
Out--

BENVOLIO:
Of love?

ROMEO:
Out of her favour, where I am in love.

BENVOLIO:
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!

ROMEO:
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O any thing, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?

BENVOLIO:
No, coz, I rather weep.

ROMEO:
Good heart, at what?

BENVOLIO:
At thy good heart's oppression.

ROMEO:
Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.

BENVOLIO:
Soft! I will go along;
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

ROMEO:
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

BENVOLIO:
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.

ROMEO:
What, shall I groan and tell thee?

BENVOLIO:
Groan! why, no.
But sadly tell me who.

ROMEO:
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

BENVOLIO:
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.

ROMEO:
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.

BENVOLIO:
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

ROMEO:
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That when she dies with beauty dies her store.

BENVOLIO:
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

ROMEO:
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
For beauty starved with her severity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair:
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.

BENVOLIO:
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.

ROMEO:
O, teach me how I should forget to think.

BENVOLIO:
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.

ROMEO:
'Tis the way
To call hers exquisite, in question more:
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
Being black put us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.

BENVOLIO:
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.

CAPULET:
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

PARIS:
Of honourable reckoning are you both;
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?

CAPULET:
But saying o'er what I have said before:
My child is yet a stranger in the world;
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.

PARIS:
Younger than she are happy mothers made.

CAPULET:
And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love; and you, among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which on more view, of many mine being one
May stand in number, though in reckoning none,
Come, go with me.
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

Servant:
Find them out whose names are written here! It is
written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
sent to find those persons whose names are here
writ, and can never find what names the writing
person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.

BENVOLIO:
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.

ROMEO:
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.

BENVOLIO:
For what, I pray thee?

ROMEO:
For your broken shin.

BENVOLIO:
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

ROMEO:
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.

Servant:
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

ROMEO:
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Servant:
Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I
pray, can you read any thing you see?

ROMEO:
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

Servant:
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!

ROMEO:
Stay, fellow; I can read.
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
assembly: whither should they come?

Servant:
Up.

ROMEO:
Whither?

Servant:
To supper; to our house.

ROMEO:
Whose house?

Servant:
My master's.

ROMEO:
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.

Servant:
Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the
great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house
of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
Rest you merry!

BENVOLIO:
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
With all the admired beauties of Verona:
Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

ROMEO:
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

BENVOLIO:
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.

ROMEO:
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.

LADY CAPULET:
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.

Nurse:
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!

JULIET:
How now! who calls?

Nurse:
Your mother.

JULIET:
Madam, I am here.
What is your will?

LADY CAPULET:
This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;
I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.

Nurse:
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.

LADY CAPULET:
She's not fourteen.

Nurse:
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?

LADY CAPULET:
A fortnight and odd days.

Nurse:
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me: but, as I said,
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge:
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood,
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before, she broke her brow:
And then my husband--God be with his soul!
A' was a merry man--took up the child:
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'

LADY CAPULET:
Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.

Nurse:
Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'

JULIET:
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.

Nurse:
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.

LADY CAPULET:
Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?

JULIET:
It is an honour that I dream not of.

Nurse:
An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

LADY CAPULET:
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers: by my count,
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

Nurse:
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.

LADY CAPULET:
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.

Nurse:
Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.

LADY CAPULET:
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide:
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.

Nurse:
No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men.

LADY CAPULET:
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?

JULIET:
I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Servant:
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.

LADY CAPULET:
We follow thee.
Juliet, the county stays.

Nurse:
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.

ROMEO:
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without a apology?

BENVOLIO:
The date is out of such prolixity:
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

ROMEO:
Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.

ROMEO:
Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

MERCUTIO:
You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.

ROMEO:
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

MERCUTIO:
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

ROMEO:
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.

MERCUTIO:
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in:
A visor for a visor! what care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

BENVOLIO:
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in,
But every man betake him to his legs.

ROMEO:
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.

MERCUTIO:
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

ROMEO:
Nay, that's not so.

MERCUTIO:
I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

ROMEO:
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But 'tis no wit to go.

MERCUTIO:
Why, may one ask?

ROMEO:
I dream'd a dream to-night.

MERCUTIO:
And so did I.

ROMEO:
Well, what was yours?

MERCUTIO:
That dreamers often lie.

ROMEO:
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.

MERCUTIO:
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
The traces of the smallest spider's web,
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Not so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
Then dreams, he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she--

ROMEO:
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.

MERCUTIO:
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

BENVOLIO:
This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves;
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

ROMEO:
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.

BENVOLIO:
Strike, drum.

First Servant:
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!

Second Servant:
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.

First Servant:
Away with the joint-stools, remove the
court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save
me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let
the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
Antony, and Potpan!

Second Servant:
Ay, boy, ready.

First Servant:
You are looked for and called for, asked for and
sought for, in the great chamber.

Second Servant:
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be
brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

CAPULET:
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
For you and I are past our dancing days:
How long is't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?

Second Capulet:
By'r lady, thirty years.

CAPULET:
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
Come pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.

Second Capulet:
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.

CAPULET:
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.

ROMEO:

Servant:
I know not, sir.

ROMEO:
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

TYBALT:
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.

CAPULET:
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?

TYBALT:
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.

CAPULET:
Young Romeo is it?

TYBALT:
'Tis he, that villain Romeo.

CAPULET:
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
He bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.

TYBALT:
It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
I'll not endure him.

CAPULET:
He shall be endured:
What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
Am I the master here, or you? go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

TYBALT:
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

CAPULET:
Go to, go to;
You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!

TYBALT:
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.

ROMEO:

JULIET:
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

ROMEO:
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?

JULIET:
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

ROMEO:
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

JULIET:
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

ROMEO:
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.

JULIET:
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.

ROMEO:
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.

JULIET:
You kiss by the book.

Nurse:
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.

ROMEO:
What is her mother?

Nurse:
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.

ROMEO:
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.

BENVOLIO:
Away, begone; the sport is at the best.

ROMEO:
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.

CAPULET:
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
I'll to my rest.

JULIET:
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?

Nurse:
The son and heir of old Tiberio.

JULIET:
What's he that now is going out of door?

Nurse:
Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.

JULIET:
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?

Nurse:
I know not.

JULIET:
Go ask his name: if he be married.
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.

Nurse:
His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
The only son of your great enemy.

JULIET:
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.

Nurse:
What's this? what's this?

JULIET:
A rhyme I learn'd even now
Of one I danced withal.

Nurse:
Anon, anon!
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.

Chorus:
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new-beloved any where:
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.

ROMEO:
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!

MERCUTIO:
He is wise;
And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.

BENVOLIO:
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!

BENVOLIO:
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.

MERCUTIO:
This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
That were some spite: my invocation
Is fair and honest, and in his mistress' name
I conjure only but to raise up him.

BENVOLIO:
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,
To be consorted with the humorous night:
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

MERCUTIO:
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:
Come, shall we go?

BENVOLIO:
Go, then; for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.

ROMEO:
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
Be not her maid, since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!

JULIET:
Ay me!

ROMEO:
She speaks:
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.

JULIET:
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

ROMEO:

JULIET:
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for that name which is no part of thee
Take all myself.

ROMEO:
I take thee at thy word:
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

JULIET:
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
So stumblest on my counsel?

ROMEO:
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee;
Had I it written, I would tear the word.

JULIET:
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?

ROMEO:
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.

JULIET:
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

ROMEO:
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do that dares love attempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

JULIET:
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.

ROMEO:
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.

JULIET:
I would not for the world they saw thee here.

ROMEO:
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
And but thou love me, let them find me here:
My life were better ended by their hate,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

JULIET:
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

ROMEO:
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.

JULIET:
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries
Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.

ROMEO:
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--

JULIET:
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.

ROMEO:
What shall I swear by?

JULIET:
Do not swear at all;
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.

ROMEO:
If my heart's dear love--

JULIET:
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

ROMEO:
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

JULIET:
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?

ROMEO:
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

JULIET:
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
And yet I would it were to give again.

ROMEO:
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?

JULIET:
But to be frank, and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.

ROMEO:
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

JULIET:
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

Nurse:

JULIET:
I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
I do beseech thee--

Nurse:

JULIET:
By and by, I come:--
To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
To-morrow will I send.

ROMEO:
So thrive my soul--

JULIET:
A thousand times good night!

ROMEO:
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
their books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.

JULIET:
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
With repetition of my Romeo's name.

ROMEO:
It is my soul that calls upon my name:
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears!

JULIET:
Romeo!

ROMEO:
My dear?

JULIET:
At what o'clock to-morrow
Shall I send to thee?

ROMEO:
At the hour of nine.

JULIET:
I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

ROMEO:
Let me stand here till thou remember it.

JULIET:
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.

ROMEO:
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.

JULIET:
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.

ROMEO:
I would I were thy bird.

JULIET:
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night! parting is such
sweet sorrow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

ROMEO:
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave that is her womb,
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give,
Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

ROMEO:
Good morrow, father.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.

ROMEO:
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?

ROMEO:
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?

ROMEO:
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

ROMEO:
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage: when and where and how
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us to-day.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.

ROMEO:
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.

ROMEO:
And bad'st me bury love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another out to have.

ROMEO:
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
The other did not so.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me,
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.

ROMEO:
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.

MERCUTIO:
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?

BENVOLIO:
Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.

MERCUTIO:
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.

BENVOLIO:
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

MERCUTIO:
A challenge, on my life.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo will answer it.

MERCUTIO:
Any man that can write may answer a letter.

BENVOLIO:
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
dares, being dared.

MERCUTIO:
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
encounter Tybalt?

BENVOLIO:
Why, what is Tybalt?

MERCUTIO:
More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
very first house, of the first and second cause:
ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
hai!

BENVOLIO:
The what?

MERCUTIO:
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
bones, their bones!

BENVOLIO:
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.

MERCUTIO:
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
fairly last night.

ROMEO:
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?

MERCUTIO:
The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?

ROMEO:
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

MERCUTIO:
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
constrains a man to bow in the hams.

ROMEO:
Meaning, to court'sy.

MERCUTIO:
Thou hast most kindly hit it.

ROMEO:
A most courteous exposition.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.

ROMEO:
Pink for flower.

MERCUTIO:
Right.

ROMEO:
Why, then is my pump well flowered.

MERCUTIO:
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.

ROMEO:
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.

MERCUTIO:
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.

ROMEO:
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.

MERCUTIO:
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
was I with you there for the goose?

ROMEO:
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
not there for the goose.

MERCUTIO:
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.

ROMEO:
Nay, good goose, bite not.

MERCUTIO:
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.

ROMEO:
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?

MERCUTIO:
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
inch narrow to an ell broad!

ROMEO:
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.

MERCUTIO:
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.

BENVOLIO:
Stop there, stop there.

MERCUTIO:
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

BENVOLIO:
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.

MERCUTIO:
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.

ROMEO:
Here's goodly gear!

MERCUTIO:
A sail, a sail!

BENVOLIO:
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.

Nurse:
Peter!

PETER:
Anon!

Nurse:
My fan, Peter.

MERCUTIO:
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
fairer face.

Nurse:
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.

MERCUTIO:
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.

Nurse:
Is it good den?

MERCUTIO:
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
dial is now upon the prick of noon.

Nurse:
Out upon you! what a man are you!

ROMEO:
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
mar.

Nurse:
By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
may find the young Romeo?

ROMEO:
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
you have found him than he was when you sought him:
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.

Nurse:
You say well.

MERCUTIO:
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
wisely, wisely.

Nurse:
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
you.

BENVOLIO:
She will indite him to some supper.

MERCUTIO:
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!

ROMEO:
What hast thou found?

MERCUTIO:
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
Is very good meat in lent
But a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score,
When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
to dinner, thither.

ROMEO:
I will follow you.

MERCUTIO:
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,
'lady, lady, lady.'

Nurse:
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?

ROMEO:
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
to in a month.

Nurse:
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?

PETER:
I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
good quarrel, and the law on my side.

Nurse:
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

ROMEO:
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
protest unto thee--

Nurse:
Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

ROMEO:
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.

Nurse:
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

ROMEO:
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.

Nurse:
No truly sir; not a penny.

ROMEO:
Go to; I say you shall.

Nurse:
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.

ROMEO:
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.

Nurse:
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.

ROMEO:
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?

Nurse:
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?

ROMEO:
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.

NURSE:
Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?

ROMEO:
Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.

Nurse:
Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
the--No; I know it begins with some other
letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
to hear it.

ROMEO:
Commend me to thy lady.

Nurse:
Ay, a thousand times.
Peter!

PETER:
Anon!

Nurse:
Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.

JULIET:
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills:
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me:
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
O God, she comes!
O honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Nurse:
Peter, stay at the gate.

JULIET:
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

Nurse:
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!

JULIET:
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.

Nurse:
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

JULIET:
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?

Nurse:
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not
how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his
face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
though they be not to be talked on, yet they are
past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,
but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?

JULIET:
No, no: but all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? what of that?

Nurse:
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about,
To catch my death with jaunting up and down!

JULIET:
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?

Nurse:
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?

JULIET:
Where is my mother! why, she is within;
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?'

Nurse:
O God's lady dear!
Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.

JULIET:
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?

Nurse:
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?

JULIET:
I have.

Nurse:
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.

JULIET:
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That after hours with sorrow chide us not!

ROMEO:
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare;
It is enough I may but call her mine.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite:
Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:
A lover may bestride the gossamer
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

JULIET:
Good even to my ghostly confessor.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.

JULIET:
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.

ROMEO:
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.

JULIET:
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.

BENVOLIO:
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

MERCUTIO:
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
upon the table and says 'God send me no need of
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.

BENVOLIO:
Am I like such a fellow?

MERCUTIO:
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
soon moody to be moved.

BENVOLIO:
And what to?

MERCUTIO:
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!

BENVOLIO:
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.

MERCUTIO:
The fee-simple! O simple!

BENVOLIO:
By my head, here come the Capulets.

MERCUTIO:
By my heel, I care not.

TYBALT:
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.

MERCUTIO:
And but one word with one of us? couple it with
something; make it a word and a blow.

TYBALT:
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
will give me occasion.

MERCUTIO:
Could you not take some occasion without giving?

TYBALT:
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--

MERCUTIO:
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!

BENVOLIO:
We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.

MERCUTIO:
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

TYBALT:
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.

MERCUTIO:
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'

TYBALT:
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
No better term than this,--thou art a villain.

ROMEO:
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.

TYBALT:
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.

ROMEO:
I do protest, I never injured thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.

MERCUTIO:
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Alla stoccata carries it away.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?

TYBALT:
What wouldst thou have with me?

MERCUTIO:
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
ears ere it be out.

TYBALT:
I am for you.

ROMEO:
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.

MERCUTIO:
Come, sir, your passado.

ROMEO:
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!

MERCUTIO:
I am hurt.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?

BENVOLIO:
What, art thou hurt?

MERCUTIO:
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.

ROMEO:
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.

MERCUTIO:
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
was hurt under your arm.

ROMEO:
I thought all for the best.

MERCUTIO:
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
And soundly too: your houses!

ROMEO:
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!

BENVOLIO:
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.

ROMEO:
This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
This but begins the woe, others must end.

BENVOLIO:
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

ROMEO:
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.

TYBALT:
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.

ROMEO:
This shall determine that.

BENVOLIO:
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!

ROMEO:
O, I am fortune's fool!

BENVOLIO:
Why dost thou stay?

First Citizen:
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?

BENVOLIO:
There lies that Tybalt.

First Citizen:
Up, sir, go with me;
I charge thee in the princes name, obey.

PRINCE:
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?

BENVOLIO:
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

LADY CAPULET:
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!

PRINCE:
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

BENVOLIO:
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.

LADY CAPULET:
He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

PRINCE:
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?

MONTAGUE:
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.

PRINCE:
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will:
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

JULIET:
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner
As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?

Nurse:
Ay, ay, the cords.

JULIET:
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?

Nurse:
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!

JULIET:
Can heaven be so envious?

Nurse:
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

JULIET:
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
I am not I, if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no:
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Nurse:
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.

JULIET:
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

Nurse:
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!

JULIET:
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
For who is living, if those two are gone?

Nurse:
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.

JULIET:
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?

Nurse:
It did, it did; alas the day, it did!

JULIET:
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!

Nurse:
There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!

JULIET:
Blister'd be thy tongue
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!

Nurse:
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?

JULIET:
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
But, O, it presses to my memory,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished;'
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there:
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Which modern lamentations might have moved?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?

Nurse:
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

JULIET:
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:
He made you for a highway to my bed;
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!

Nurse:
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.

JULIET:
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:
Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.

ROMEO:
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company:
I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.

ROMEO:
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
Not body's death, but body's banishment.

ROMEO:
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hence from Verona art thou banished:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

ROMEO:
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
And world's exile is death: then banished,
Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.

ROMEO:
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
But Romeo may not: more validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished:
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
They are free men, but I am banished.
And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.

ROMEO:
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

ROMEO:
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

ROMEO:
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

ROMEO:
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.

ROMEO:
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;
Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
What simpleness is this! I come, I come!
Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?

Nurse:

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Welcome, then.

Nurse:
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

Nurse:
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man:
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
Why should you fall into so deep an O?

ROMEO:
Nurse!

Nurse:
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.

ROMEO:
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?

Nurse:
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.

ROMEO:
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold thy desperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast:
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too:
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:
A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
Romeo is coming.

Nurse:
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

ROMEO:
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.

Nurse:
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

ROMEO:
How well my comfort is revived by this!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here:
Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.

ROMEO:
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.

CAPULET:
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
That we have had no time to move our daughter:
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.

PARIS:
These times of woe afford no time to woo.
Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.

LADY CAPULET:
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.

CAPULET:
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
But, soft! what day is this?

PARIS:
Monday, my lord,

CAPULET:
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two;
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?

PARIS:
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.

CAPULET:
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me! it is so very very late,
That we may call it early by and by.
Good night.

JULIET:
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.

ROMEO:
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

JULIET:
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.

ROMEO:
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
I have more care to stay than will to go:
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.

JULIET:
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us:
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.

ROMEO:
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!

Nurse:
Madam!

JULIET:
Nurse?

Nurse:
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
The day is broke; be wary, look about.

JULIET:
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.

ROMEO:
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.

JULIET:
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days:
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo!

ROMEO:
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

JULIET:
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?

ROMEO:
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

JULIET:
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.

ROMEO:
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!

JULIET:
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.

LADY CAPULET:

JULIET:
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

LADY CAPULET:
Why, how now, Juliet!

JULIET:
Madam, I am not well.

LADY CAPULET:
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love;
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

JULIET:
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

LADY CAPULET:
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.

JULIET:
Feeling so the loss,
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

LADY CAPULET:
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

JULIET:
What villain madam?

LADY CAPULET:
That same villain, Romeo.

JULIET:

LADY CAPULET:
That is, because the traitor murderer lives.

JULIET:
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!

LADY CAPULET:
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

JULIET:
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!

LADY CAPULET:
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.

JULIET:
And joy comes well in such a needy time:
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?

LADY CAPULET:
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.

JULIET:
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?

LADY CAPULET:
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
The gallant, young and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.

JULIET:
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!

LADY CAPULET:
Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

CAPULET:
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains downright.
How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind;
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?

LADY CAPULET:
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave!

CAPULET:
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?

JULIET:
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have:
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.

CAPULET:
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'
And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!

LADY CAPULET:
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?

JULIET:
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

CAPULET:
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face:
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her:
Out on her, hilding!

Nurse:
God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

CAPULET:
And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.

Nurse:
I speak no treason.

CAPULET:
O, God ye god-den.

Nurse:
May not one speak?

CAPULET:
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
For here we need it not.

LADY CAPULET:
You are too hot.

CAPULET:
God's bread! it makes me mad:
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match'd: and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:
Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.

JULIET:
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.

LADY CAPULET:
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

JULIET:
O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.

Nurse:
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the county.
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.

JULIET:
Speakest thou from thy heart?

Nurse:
And from my soul too;
Or else beshrew them both.

JULIET:
Amen!

Nurse:
What?

JULIET:
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
To make confession and to be absolved.

Nurse:
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.

JULIET:
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
If all else fail, myself have power to die.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.

PARIS:
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
You say you do not know the lady's mind:
Uneven is the course, I like it not.

PARIS:
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears;
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society:
Now do you know the reason of this haste.

FRIAR LAURENCE:

PARIS:
Happily met, my lady and my wife!

JULIET:
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

PARIS:
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.

JULIET:
What must be shall be.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
That's a certain text.

PARIS:
Come you to make confession to this father?

JULIET:
To answer that, I should confess to you.

PARIS:
Do not deny to him that you love me.

JULIET:
I will confess to you that I love him.

PARIS:
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.

JULIET:
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

PARIS:
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.

JULIET:
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.

PARIS:
Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.

JULIET:
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

PARIS:
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.

JULIET:
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

PARIS:
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.

JULIET:
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this county.

JULIET:
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak; I long to die,
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That copest with death himself to scape from it:
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.

JULIET:
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower;
Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come: and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame;
If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
Abate thy valour in the acting it.

JULIET:
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

JULIET:
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father!

CAPULET:
So many guests invite as here are writ.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.

Second Servant:
You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they
can lick their fingers.

CAPULET:
How canst thou try them so?

Second Servant:
Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.

CAPULET:
Go, be gone.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

Nurse:
Ay, forsooth.

CAPULET:
Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.

Nurse:
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.

CAPULET:
How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?

JULIET:
Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.

CAPULET:
Send for the county; go tell him of this:
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

JULIET:
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.

CAPULET:
Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
This is as't should be. Let me see the county;
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
Our whole city is much bound to him.

JULIET:
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?

LADY CAPULET:
No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.

CAPULET:
Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.

LADY  CAPULET:
We shall be short in our provision:
'Tis now near night.

CAPULET:
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

JULIET:
Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
I pray thee, leave me to myself to-night,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.

LADY CAPULET:
What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?

JULIET:
No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
In this so sudden business.

LADY CAPULET:
Good night:
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.

JULIET:
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up the heat of life:
I'll call them back again to comfort me:
Nurse! What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.
What if it be a poison, which the friar
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort;--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears?
And madly play with my forefather's joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

LADY CAPULET:
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

Nurse:
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

CAPULET:
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:
Spare not for the cost.

Nurse:
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, You'll be sick to-morrow
For this night's watching.

CAPULET:
No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

LADY CAPULET:
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.

CAPULET:
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Now, fellow,
What's there?

First Servant:
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

CAPULET:
Make haste, make haste.
Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

Second Servant:
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.

CAPULET:
Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
The county will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would: I hear him near.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;
I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
Make haste, I say.

Nurse:
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the county take you in your bed;
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
I must needs wake you; Lady! lady! lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!

LADY CAPULET:
What noise is here?

Nurse:
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET:
What is the matter?

Nurse:
Look, look! O heavy day!

LADY CAPULET:
O me, O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Help, help! Call help.

CAPULET:
For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.

Nurse:
She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!

LADY CAPULET:
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!

CAPULET:
Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Life and these lips have long been separated:
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.

Nurse:
O lamentable day!

LADY CAPULET:
O woful time!

CAPULET:
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?

CAPULET:
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son! the night before thy wedding-day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.

PARIS:
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?

LADY CAPULET:
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!

Nurse:
O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day,
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this:
O woful day, O woful day!

PARIS:
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!

CAPULET:
Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
And with my child my joys are buried.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid:
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion;
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
She's not well married that lives married long;
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse; and, as the custom is,
In all her best array bear her to church:
For though fond nature bids us an lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.

CAPULET:
All things that we ordained festival,
Turn from their office to black funeral;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave:
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.

First Musician:
Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.

Nurse:
Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up;
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

First Musician:
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

PETER:
Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's
ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'

First Musician:
Why 'Heart's ease?'

PETER:
O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,
to comfort me.

First Musician:
Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.

PETER:
You will not, then?

First Musician:
No.

PETER:
I will then give it you soundly.

First Musician:
What will you give us?

PETER:
No money, on my faith, but the gleek;
I will give you the minstrel.

First Musician:
Then I will give you the serving-creature.

PETER:
Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
I'll fa you; do you note me?

First Musician:
An you re us and fa us, you note us.

Second Musician:
Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

PETER:
Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
me like men:
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Then music with her silver sound'--
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?

Musician:
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

PETER:
Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

Second Musician:
I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.

PETER:
Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

Third Musician:
Faith, I know not what to say.

PETER:
O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say
for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
because musicians have no gold for sounding:
'Then music with her silver sound
With speedy help doth lend redress.'

First Musician:
What a pestilent knave is this same!

Second Musician:
Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry for the
mourners, and stay dinner.

ROMEO:
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
to think!--
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revived, and was an emperor.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.

BALTHASAR:
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
And presently took post to tell it you:
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

ROMEO:
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.

BALTHASAR:
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.

ROMEO:
Tush, thou art deceived:
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

BALTHASAR:
No, my good lord.

ROMEO:
No matter: get thee gone,
And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
I do remember an apothecary,--
And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
'An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
What, ho! apothecary!

Apothecary:
Who calls so loud?

ROMEO:
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.

Apothecary:
Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.

ROMEO:
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.

Apothecary:
My poverty, but not my will, consents.

ROMEO:
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.

Apothecary:
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

ROMEO:
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.

FRIAR JOHN:
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!

FRIAR LAURENCE:
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

FRIAR JOHN:
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?

FRIAR JOHN:
I could not send it,--here it is again,--
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Unto my cell.

FRIAR JOHN:
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Now must I to the monument alone;
Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!

PARIS:
Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.

PAGE:

PARIS:
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.

ROMEO:
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my lady's face;
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

BALTHASAR:
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

ROMEO:
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.

BALTHASAR:

ROMEO:
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!

PARIS:
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died;
And here is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

ROMEO:
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.

PARIS:
I do defy thy conjurations,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.

ROMEO:
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!

PAGE:
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

PARIS:
O, I am slain!
If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

ROMEO:
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
A lightning before death: O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again: here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Here's to my love!
O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?

BALTHASAR:
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.

BALTHASAR:
It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
One that you love.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Who is it?

BALTHASAR:
Romeo.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
How long hath he been there?

BALTHASAR:
Full half an hour.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Go with me to the vault.

BALTHASAR:
I dare not, sir
My master knows not but I am gone hence;
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his intents.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Stay, then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

BALTHASAR:
As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
Romeo!
Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.

JULIET:
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Come, go, good Juliet,
I dare no longer stay.

JULIET:
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make die with a restorative.
Thy lips are warm.

First Watchman:

JULIET:
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
This is thy sheath;
there rust, and let me die.

PAGE:
This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.

First Watchman:
The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

Second Watchman:
Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.

First Watchman:
Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.

Third Watchman:
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
As he was coming from this churchyard side.

First Watchman:
A great suspicion: stay the friar too.

PRINCE:
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning's rest?

CAPULET:
What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

LADY CAPULET:
The people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
With open outcry toward our monument.

PRINCE:
What fear is this which startles in our ears?

First Watchman:
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new kill'd.

PRINCE:
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

First Watchman:
Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man;
With instruments upon them, fit to open
These dead men's tombs.

CAPULET:
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,--
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!

LADY CAPULET:
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.

PRINCE:
Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.

MONTAGUE:
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
What further woe conspires against mine age?

PRINCE:
Look, and thou shalt see.

MONTAGUE:
O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
To press before thy father to a grave?

PRINCE:
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their
true descent;
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me of this direful murder;
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.

PRINCE:
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.

FRIAR LAURENCE:
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
To County Paris: then comes she to me,
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come as this dire night,
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth,
And bear this work of heaven with patience:
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.

PRINCE:
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?

BALTHASAR:
I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
I departed not and left him there.

PRINCE:
Give me the letter; I will look on it.
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?

PAGE:
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
And by and by my master drew on him;
And then I ran away to call the watch.

PRINCE:
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
And I for winking at your discords too
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.

CAPULET:
O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.

MONTAGUE:
But I can give thee more:
For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
That while Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.

CAPULET:
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

PRINCE:
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

WARWICK:
I wonder how the king escaped our hands.

YORK:
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slily stole away and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheer'd up the drooping army; and himself,
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battle's front, and breaking in
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.

EDWARD:
Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerously;
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow:
That this is true, father, behold his blood.

MONTAGUE:
And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood,
Whom I encounter'd as the battles join'd.

RICHARD:
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.

YORK:
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?

NORFOLK:
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!

RICHARD:
Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.

WARWICK:
And so do I. Victorious Prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat: possess it, York;
For this is thine and not King Henry's heirs'

YORK:
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
For hither we have broken in by force.

NORFOLK:
We'll all assist you; he that flies shall die.

YORK:
Thanks, gentle Norfolk: stay by me, my lords;
And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.

WARWICK:
And when the king comes, offer no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.

YORK:
The queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council:
By words or blows here let us win our right.

RICHARD:
Arm'd as we are, let's stay within this house.

WARWICK:
The bloody parliament shall this be call'd,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us by-words to our enemies.

YORK:
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute;
I mean to take possession of my right.

WARWICK:
Neither the king, nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing, if Warwick shake his bells.
I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.

KING HENRY VI:
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means,
Back'd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father.
And thine, Lord Clifford; and you both have vow'd revenge
On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!

CLIFFORD:
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.

WESTMORELAND:
What, shall we suffer this? let's pluck him down:
My heart for anger burns; I cannot brook it.

KING HENRY VI:
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.

CLIFFORD:
Patience is for poltroons, such as he:
He durst not sit there, had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament
Let us assail the family of York.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Well hast thou spoken, cousin: be it so.

KING HENRY VI:
Ah, know you not the city favours them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?

EXETER:
But when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.

KING HENRY VI:
Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart,
To make a shambles of the parliament-house!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne,
and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet;
I am thy sovereign.

YORK:
I am thine.

EXETER:
For shame, come down: he made thee Duke of York.

YORK:
'Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.

EXETER:
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.

WARWICK:
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.

CLIFFORD:
Whom should he follow but his natural king?

WARWICK:
True, Clifford; and that's Richard Duke of York.

KING HENRY VI:
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?

YORK:
It must and shall be so: content thyself.

WARWICK:
Be Duke of Lancaster; let him be king.

WESTMORELAND:
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster;
And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.

WARWICK:
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
March'd through the city to the palace gates.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.

WESTMORELAND:
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsman and thy friends, I'll have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.

CLIFFORD:
Urge it no more; lest that, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
As shall revenge his death before I stir.

WARWICK:
Poor Clifford! how I scorn his worthless threats!

YORK:
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.

KING HENRY VI:
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
And seized upon their towns and provinces.

WARWICK:
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.

KING HENRY VI:
The lord protector lost it, and not I:
When I was crown'd I was but nine months old.

RICHARD:
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crown from the usurper's head.

EDWARD:
Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.

MONTAGUE:
Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms,
Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.

RICHARD:
Sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.

YORK:
Sons, peace!

KING HENRY VI:
Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.

WARWICK:
Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords;
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.

KING HENRY VI:
Think'st thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No: first shall war unpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
And now in England to our heart's great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My title's good, and better far than his.

WARWICK:
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.

KING HENRY VI:
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.

YORK:
'Twas by rebellion against his king.

KING HENRY VI:

YORK:
What then?

KING HENRY VI:
An if he may, then am I lawful king;
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resign'd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.

YORK:
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.

WARWICK:
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd,
Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown?

EXETER:
No; for he could not so resign his crown
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.

KING HENRY VI:
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?

EXETER:
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.

YORK:
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?

EXETER:
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.

KING HENRY VI:

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.

WARWICK:
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Thou art deceived: 'tis not thy southern power,
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the duke up in despite of me.

CLIFFORD:
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!

KING HENRY VI:
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!

YORK:
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?

WARWICK:
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.

KING HENRY VI:
My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word:
Let me for this my life-time reign as king.

YORK:
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.

KING HENRY VI:
I am content: Richard Plantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.

CLIFFORD:
What wrong is this unto the prince your son!

WARWICK:
What good is this to England and himself!

WESTMORELAND:
Base, fearful and despairing Henry!

CLIFFORD:
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!

WESTMORELAND:
I cannot stay to hear these articles.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Nor I.

CLIFFORD:
Come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.

WESTMORELAND:
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed!

CLIFFORD:
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandon'd and despised!

WARWICK:
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.

EXETER:
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.

KING HENRY VI:
Ah, Exeter!

WARWICK:
Why should you sigh, my lord?

KING HENRY VI:
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may: I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live,
To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.

YORK:
This oath I willingly take and will perform.

WARWICK:
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet embrace him.

KING HENRY VI:
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!

YORK:
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.

EXETER:
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!

YORK:
Farewell, my gracious lord; I'll to my castle.

WARWICK:
And I'll keep London with my soldiers.

NORFOLK:
And I to Norfolk with my followers.

MONTAGUE:
And I unto the sea from whence I came.

KING HENRY VI:
And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.

EXETER:
Here comes the queen, whose looks bewray her anger:
I'll steal away.

KING HENRY VI:
Exeter, so will I.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.

KING HENRY VI:
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man! would I had died a maid
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourish'd him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather than have that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Father, you cannot disinherit me:
If you be king, why should not I succeed?

KING HENRY VI:
Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son:
The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Enforced thee! art thou king, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me;
And given unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it, but to make thy sepulchre
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is chancellor and the lord of Calais;
Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
The duke is made protector of the realm;
And yet shalt thou be safe? such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou preferr'st thy life before thine honour:
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of parliament be repeal'd
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread;
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, let's away;
Our army is ready; come, we'll after them.

KING HENRY VI:
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.

KING HENRY VI:
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.

PRINCE EDWARD:
When I return with victory from the field
I'll see your grace: till then I'll follow her.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Come, son, away; we may not linger thus.

KING HENRY VI:
Poor queen! how love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
The loss of those three lords torments my heart:
I'll write unto them and entreat them fair.
Come, cousin you shall be the messenger.

EXETER:
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
3 KING HENRY VI

RICHARD:
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.

EDWARD:
No, I can better play the orator.

MONTAGUE:
But I have reasons strong and forcible.

YORK:
Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
What is your quarrel? how began it first?

EDWARD:
No quarrel, but a slight contention.

YORK:
About what?

RICHARD:
About that which concerns your grace and us;
The crown of England, father, which is yours.

YORK:
Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead.

RICHARD:
Your right depends not on his life or death.

EDWARD:
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.

YORK:
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.

EDWARD:
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

RICHARD:
No; God forbid your grace should be forsworn.

YORK:
I shall be, if I claim by open war.

RICHARD:
I'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.

YORK:
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.

RICHARD:
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate,
That hath authority over him that swears:
Henry had none, but did usurp the place;
Then, seeing 'twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown;
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.

YORK:
Richard, enough; I will be king, or die.
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of our intent.
You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
In them I trust; for they are soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employ'd, what resteth more,
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the king not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post?

Messenger:
The queen with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle:
She is hard by with twenty thousand men;
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.

YORK:
Ay, with my sword. What! think'st thou that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
My brother Montague shall post to London:
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left protectors of the king,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.

MONTAGUE:
Brother, I go; I'll win them, fear it not:
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour;
The army of the queen mean to besiege us.

JOHN MORTIMER:
She shall not need; we'll meet her in the field.

YORK:
What, with five thousand men?

RICHARD:
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need:
A woman's general; what should we fear?

EDWARD:
I hear their drums: let's set our men in order,
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.

YORK:
Five men to twenty! though the odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
Many a battle have I won in France,
When as the enemy hath been ten to one:
Why should I not now have the like success?
3 KING HENRY VI

RUTLAND:
Ah, whither shall I fly to 'scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes!

CLIFFORD:
Chaplain, away! thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

Tutor:
And I, my lord, will bear him company.

CLIFFORD:
Soldiers, away with him!

Tutor:
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man!

CLIFFORD:
How now! is he dead already? or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.

RUTLAND:
So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey,
And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
And not with such a cruel threatening look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath:
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.

CLIFFORD:
In vain thou speak'st, poor boy; my father's blood
Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.

RUTLAND:
Then let my father's blood open it again:
He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.

CLIFFORD:
Had thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me;
No, if I digg'd up thy forefathers' graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul;
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore--

RUTLAND:
O, let me pray before I take my death!
To thee I pray; sweet Clifford, pity me!

CLIFFORD:
Such pity as my rapier's point affords.

RUTLAND:
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?

CLIFFORD:
Thy father hath.

RUTLAND:
But 'twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days;
And when I give occasion of offence,
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.

CLIFFORD:
No cause!
Thy father slew my father; therefore, die.

RUTLAND:
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!

CLIFFORD:
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy son's blood cleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,
Congeal'd with this, do make me wipe off both.
3 KING HENRY VI

YORK:
The army of the queen hath got the field:
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them:
But this I know, they have demean'd themselves
Like men born to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me.
And thrice cried 'Courage, father! fight it out!'
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encounter'd him:
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried 'Charge! and give no foot of ground!'
And cried 'A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!'
With this, we charged again: but, out, alas!
We bodged again; as I have seen a swan
With bootless labour swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
Ah, hark! the fatal followers do pursue;
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury:
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury:
The sands are number'd that make up my life;
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage:
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.

CLIFFORD:
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm,
With downright payment, show'd unto my father.
Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noontide prick.

YORK:
My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
A bird that will revenge upon you all:
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? what! multitudes, and fear?

CLIFFORD:
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
So doves do peck the falcon's piercing talons;
So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives 'gainst the officers.

YORK:
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought o'er-run my former time;
And, if though canst for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!

CLIFFORD:
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.
Wrath makes him deaf: speak thou, Northumberland.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart:
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is war's prize to take all vantages;
And ten to one is no impeach of valour.

CLIFFORD:
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
So doth the cony struggle in the net.

YORK:
So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty;
So true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
What would your grace have done unto him now?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here,
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
What! was it you that would be England's king?
Was't you that revell'd in our parliament,
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And where's that valiant crook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York: I stain'd this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford, with his rapier's point,
Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee, grieve, to make me merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death?
Why art thou patient, man? thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou wouldst be fee'd, I see, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.
A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.
And will you pale your head in Henry's glory,
And rob his temples of the diadem,
Now in his life, against your holy oath?
O, 'tis a fault too too unpardonable!
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head;
And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.

CLIFFORD:
That is my office, for my father's sake.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, stay; lets hear the orisons he makes.

YORK:
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph, like an Amazonian trull,
Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
But that thy face is, vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Unless the adage must be verified,
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
'Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
But, God he knows, thy share thereof is small:
'Tis virtue that doth make them most admired;
The contrary doth make thee wonder'd at:
'Tis government that makes them seem divine;
The want thereof makes thee abominable:
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the septentrion.
O tiger's heart wrapt in a woman's hide!
How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a woman's face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible;
Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bids't thou me rage? why, now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will:
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutland's obsequies:
And every drop cries vengeance for his death,
'Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false
Frenchwoman.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Beshrew me, but his passion moves me so
That hardly can I cheque my eyes from tears.

YORK:
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood:
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears:
This cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this:
And if thou tell'st the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
Yea even my foes will shed fast-falling tears,
And say 'Alas, it was a piteous deed!'
There, take the crown, and, with the crown, my curse;
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world:
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
I should not for my life but weep with him.
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.

QUEEN MARGARET:
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.

CLIFFORD:
Here's for my oath, here's for my father's death.

QUEEN MARGARET:
And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.

YORK:
Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Off with his head, and set it on York gates;
So York may overlook the town of York.
3 KING HENRY VI

EDWARD:
I wonder how our princely father 'scaped,
Or whether he be 'scaped away or no
From Clifford's and Northumberland's pursuit:
Had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
Or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? why is he so sad?

RICHARD:
I cannot joy, until I be resolved
Where our right valiant father is become.
I saw him in the battle range about;
And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat;
Or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs,
Who having pinch'd a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
So fared our father with his enemies;
So fled his enemies my warlike father:
Methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun!
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love!

EDWARD:
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?

RICHARD:
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun;
Not separated with the racking clouds,
But sever'd in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vow'd some league inviolable:
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figures some event.

EDWARD:
'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
And over-shine the earth as this the world.
Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair-shining suns.

RICHARD:
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.
But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?

Messenger:
Ah, one that was a woful looker-on
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord!

EDWARD:
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much.

RICHARD:
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.

Messenger:
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have enter'd Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hew down and fell the hardest-timber'd oak.
By many hands your father was subdued;
But only slaughter'd by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the queen,
Who crown'd the gracious duke in high despite,
Laugh'd in his face; and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head, and on the gates of York
They set the same; and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that e'er I view'd.

EDWARD:
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! thou hast slain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry;
And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.
Now my soul's palace is become a prison:
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
For never henceforth shall I joy again,
Never, O never shall I see more joy!

RICHARD:
I cannot weep; for all my body's moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen;
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me
Richard, I bear thy name; I'll venge thy death,
Or die renowned by attempting it.

EDWARD:
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.

RICHARD:
Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird,
Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun:
For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say;
Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.

WARWICK:
How now, fair lords! What fare? what news abroad?

RICHARD:
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each word's deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!

EDWARD:
O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet,
Which held three dearly as his soul's redemption,
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

WARWICK:
Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears;
And now, to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
I, then in London keeper of the king,
Muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends,
And very well appointed, as I thought,
March'd toward Saint Alban's to intercept the queen,
Bearing the king in my behalf along;
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in parliament
Touching King Henry's oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Alban's met
Our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought:
But whether 'twas the coldness of the king,
Who look'd full gently on his warlike queen,
That robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen;
Or whether 'twas report of her success;
Or more than common fear of Clifford's rigour,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went;
Our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
I cheer'd them up with justice of our cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards:
But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
And we in them no hope to win the day;
So that we fled; the king unto the queen;
Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself,
In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you:
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.

EDWARD:
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?

WARWICK:
Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers;
And for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.

RICHARD:
'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.

WARWICK:
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henry's head,
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.

RICHARD:
I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not:
'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
But in this troublous time what's to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel,
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.

WARWICK:
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out;
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the parliament;
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry 'Charge upon our foes!'
But never once again turn back and fly.

RICHARD:
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:
Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day,
That cries 'Retire,' if Warwick bid him stay.

EDWARD:
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;
And when thou fail'st--as God forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!

WARWICK:
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
The next degree is England's royal throne;
For King of England shalt thou be proclaim'd
In every borough as we pass along;
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets, and about our task.

RICHARD:
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.

EDWARD:
Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us!

WARWICK:
How now! what news?

Messenger:
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The queen is coming with a puissant host;
And craves your company for speedy counsel.

WARWICK:
Why then it sorts, brave warriors, let's away.
3 KING HENRY VI

QUEEN MARGARET:
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonder's the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompass'd with your crown:
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! 'tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.

CLIFFORD:
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York doth level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows:
He, but a duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue, like a loving sire;
Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
And though man's face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climb'd unto their nest,
Offer their own lives in their young's defence?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his father's fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
'What my great-grandfather and his grandsire got
My careless father fondly gave away'?
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.

KING HENRY VI:
Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill-got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
I'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind;
And would my father had left me no more!
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
Than in possession and jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!

QUEEN MARGARET:
My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son:
Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.

KING HENRY VI:
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;
And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.

PRINCE:
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
I'll draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel use it to the death.

CLIFFORD:
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.

Messenger:
Royal commanders, be in readiness:
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York;
And in the towns, as they do march along,
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him:
Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.

CLIFFORD:
I would your highness would depart the field:
The queen hath best success when you are absent.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, that's my fortune too; therefore I'll stay.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
Be it with resolution then to fight.

PRINCE EDWARD:
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
And hearten those that fight in your defence:
Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry 'Saint George!'

EDWARD:
Now, perjured Henry! wilt thou kneel for grace,
And set thy diadem upon my head;
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?

EDWARD:
I am his king, and he should bow his knee;
I was adopted heir by his consent:
Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
You, that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by new act of parliament,
To blot out me, and put his own son in.

CLIFFORD:
And reason too:
Who should succeed the father but the son?

RICHARD:
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!

CLIFFORD:
Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he the proudest of thy sort.

RICHARD:
'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not?

CLIFFORD:
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.

RICHARD:
For God's sake, lords, give signal to the fight.

WARWICK:
What say'st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak?
When you and I met at Saint Alban's last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.

WARWICK:
Then 'twas my turn to fly, and now 'tis thine.

CLIFFORD:
You said so much before, and yet you fled.

WARWICK:
'Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.

NORTHUMBERLAND:
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.

RICHARD:
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.

CLIFFORD:
I slew thy father, call'st thou him a child?

RICHARD:
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;
But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.

KING HENRY VI:
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.

KING HENRY VI:
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:
I am a king, and privileged to speak.

CLIFFORD:
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words; therefore be still.

RICHARD:
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made us all, I am resolved
that Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.

EDWARD:
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,
That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.

WARWICK:
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;
For York in justice puts his armour on.

PRINCE EDWARD:
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but every thing is right.

RICHARD:
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
For, well I wot, thou hast thy mother's tongue.

QUEEN MARGARET:
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;
But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,
Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads, or lizards' dreadful stings.

RICHARD:
Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,--
As if a channel should be call'd the sea,--
Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?

EDWARD:
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
To make this shameless callet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wrong'd
By that false woman, as this king by thee.
His father revell'd in the heart of France,
And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop;
And had he match'd according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day;
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day,
Even then that sunshine brew'd a shower for him,
That wash'd his father's fortunes forth of France,
And heap'd sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slipp'd our claim until another age.

GEORGE:
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root;
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike,
We'll never leave till we have hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.

EDWARD:
And, in this resolution, I defy thee;
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave!
And either victory, or else a grave.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Stay, Edward.

EDWARD:
No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay:
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe;
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robb'd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.

EDWARD:
Smile, gentle heaven! or strike, ungentle death!
For this world frowns, and Edward's sun is clouded.

WARWICK:
How now, my lord! what hap? what hope of good?

GEORGE:
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:
What counsel give you? whither shall we fly?

EDWARD:
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings;
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.

RICHARD:
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brother's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broach'd with the steely point of Clifford's lance;
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangour heard from far,
'Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!'
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.

WARWICK:
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:
I'll kill my horse, because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage;
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow to God above,
I'll never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Or fortune given me measure of revenge.

EDWARD:
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine;
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise from the earth's cold face,
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching thee, if with they will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul!
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Where'er it be, in heaven or in earth.

RICHARD:
Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe
That winter should cut off our spring-time so.

WARWICK:
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.

GEORGE:
Yet let us all together to our troops,
And give them leave to fly that will not stay;
And call them pillars that will stand to us;
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian games:
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts;
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer, make we hence amain.
3 KING HENRY VI

RICHARD:
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,
Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.

CLIFFORD:
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone:
This is the hand that stabb'd thy father York;
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;
And here's the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself;
And so, have at thee!

RICHARD:
Nay Warwick, single out some other chase;
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING HENRY VI:
This battle fares like to the morning's war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind:
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
Now one the better, then another best;
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered:
So is the equal of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
To whom God will, there be the victory!
For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
Have chid me from the battle; swearing both
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead! if God's good will were so;
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
O God! methinks it were a happy life,
To be no better than a homely swain;
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run,
How many make the hour full complete;
How many hours bring about the day;
How many days will finish up the year;
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock;
So many hours must I take my rest;
So many hours must I contemplate;
So many hours must I sport myself;
So many days my ewes have been with young;
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean:
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Pass'd over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
Than doth a rich embroider'd canopy
To kings that fear their subjects' treachery?
O, yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.
And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince's delicates,
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.

Son:
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns;
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Who's this? O God! it is my father's face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.
O heavy times, begetting such events!
From London by the king was I press'd forth;
My father, being the Earl of Warwick's man,
Came on the part of York, press'd by his master;
And I, who at his hands received my life, him
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did!
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee!
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks;
And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.

KING HENRY VI:
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man, I'll aid thee tear for tear;
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears, and break o'ercharged with grief.

Father:
Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold:
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foeman's face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! see, see what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart,
Upon thy words, that kill mine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, this miserable age!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!

KING HENRY VI:
Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our striving houses:
The one his purple blood right well resembles;
The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth:
Wither one rose, and let the other flourish;
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.

Son:
How will my mother for a father's death
Take on with me and ne'er be satisfied!

Father:
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and ne'er be satisfied!

KING HENRY VI:
How will the country for these woful chances
Misthink the king and not be satisfied!

Son:
Was ever son so rued a father's death?

Father:
Was ever father so bemoan'd his son?

KING HENRY VI:
Was ever king so grieved for subjects' woe?
Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.

Son:
I'll bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.

Father:
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thine image ne'er shall go;
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy father be,
Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
I'll bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.

KING HENRY VI:
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woful than you are.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Fly, father, fly! for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull:
Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain:
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.

EXETER:
Away! for vengeance comes along with them:
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;
Or else come after: I'll away before.

KING HENRY VI:
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the queen intends. Forward; away!
3 KING HENRY VI

CLIFFORD:
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
More than my body's parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee;
And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York,
The common people swarm like summer flies;
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henry's enemies?
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
That Phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth!
And, Henry, hadst thou sway'd as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies;
I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
Had left no mourning widows for our death;
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:
The foe is merciless, and will not pity;
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;
I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.

EDWARD:
Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust,
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?

WARWICK:
No, 'tis impossible he should escape,
For, though before his face I speak the words
Your brother Richard mark'd him for the grave:
And wheresoe'er he is, he's surely dead.

EDWARD:
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?

RICHARD:
A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.

EDWARD:
See who it is: and, now the battle's ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

RICHARD:
Revoke that doom of mercy, for 'tis Clifford;
Who not contented that he lopp'd the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murdering knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely father, Duke of York.

WARWICK:
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your father's head, which Clifford placed there;
Instead whereof let this supply the room:
Measure for measure must be answered.

EDWARD:
Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung but death to us and ours:
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.

WARWICK:
I think his understanding is bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.

RICHARD:
O, would he did! and so perhaps he doth:
'Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.

GEORGE:
If so thou think'st, vex him with eager words.

RICHARD:
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.

EDWARD:
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.

WARWICK:
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.

GEORGE:
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.

RICHARD:
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.

EDWARD:
Thou pitied'st Rutland; I will pity thee.

GEORGE:
Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now?

WARWICK:
They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.

RICHARD:
What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
I know by that he's dead; and, by my soul,
If this right hand would buy two hour's life,
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the
issuing blood
Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.

WARWICK:
Ay, but he's dead: off with the traitor's head,
And rear it in the place your father's stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned England's royal king:
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen:
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;
And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scatter'd foe that hopes to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation;
And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea,
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.

EDWARD:
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.

RICHARD:
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;
For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.

WARWICK:
Tut, that's a foolish observation:
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours in possession.
3 KING HENRY VI

First Keeper:
Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves;
For through this laund anon the deer will come;
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.

Second Keeper:
I'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.

First Keeper:
That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
I'll tell thee what befell me on a day
In this self-place where now we mean to stand.

Second Keeper:
Here comes a man; let's stay till he be past.

KING HENRY VI:
From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, 'tis no land of thine;
Thy place is fill'd, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
Thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed:
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
For how can I help them, and not myself?

First Keeper:
Ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee:
This is the quondam king; let's seize upon him.

KING HENRY VI:
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.

Second Keeper:
Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.

First Keeper:
Forbear awhile; we'll hear a little more.

KING HENRY VI:
My queen and son are gone to France for aid;
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone, to crave the French king's sister
To wife for Edward: if this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost;
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account then Margaret may win him;
For she's a woman to be pitied much:
Her sighs will make a battery in his breast;
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn;
And Nero will be tainted with remorse,
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give;
She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry,
He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed;
He smiles, and says his Edward is install'd;
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more;
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the king from her,
With promise of his sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edward's place.
O Margaret, thus 'twill be; and thou, poor soul,
Art then forsaken, as thou went'st forlorn!

Second Keeper:
Say, what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens?

KING HENRY VI:
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be;
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?

Second Keeper:
Ay, but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, so I am, in mind; and that's enough.

Second Keeper:
But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?

KING HENRY VI:
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.

Second Keeper:
Well, if you be a king crown'd with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us; for as we think,
You are the king King Edward hath deposed;
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
Will apprehend you as his enemy.

KING HENRY VI:
But did you never swear, and break an oath?

Second Keeper:
No, never such an oath; nor will not now.

KING HENRY VI:
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?

Second Keeper:
Here in this country, where we now remain.

KING HENRY VI:
I was anointed king at nine months old;
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me:
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?

First Keeper:
No;
For we were subjects but while you were king.

KING HENRY VI:
Why, am I dead? do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust;
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths; for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the king shall be commanded;
And be you kings, command, and I'll obey.

First Keeper:
We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.

KING HENRY VI:
So would you be again to Henry,
If he were seated as King Edward is.

First Keeper:
We charge you, in God's name, and the king's,
To go with us unto the officers.

KING HENRY VI:
In God's name, lead; your king's name be obey'd:
And what God will, that let your king perform;
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Alban's field
This lady's husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His lands then seized on by the conqueror:
Her suit is now to repossess those lands;
Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.

GLOUCESTER:
Your highness shall do well to grant her suit;
It were dishonour to deny it her.

KING EDWARD IV:
It were no less; but yet I'll make a pause.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Widow, we will consider of your suit;
And come some other time to know our mind.

LADY GREY:
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:
May it please your highness to resolve me now;
And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
How many children hast thou, widow? tell me.

CLARENCE:

GLOUCESTER:

LADY GREY:
Three, my most gracious lord.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.

LADY GREY:
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.

KING EDWARD IV:
Lords, give us leave: I'll try this widow's wit.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?

LADY GREY:
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.

KING EDWARD IV:
And would you not do much to do them good?

LADY GREY:
To do them good, I would sustain some harm.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then get your husband's lands, to do them good.

LADY GREY:
Therefore I came unto your majesty.

KING EDWARD IV:
I'll tell you how these lands are to be got.

LADY GREY:
So shall you bind me to your highness' service.

KING EDWARD IV:
What service wilt thou do me, if I give them?

LADY GREY:
What you command, that rests in me to do.

KING EDWARD IV:
But you will take exceptions to my boon.

LADY GREY:
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.

LADY GREY:
Why, then I will do what your grace commands.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

LADY GREY:
Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?

KING EDWARD IV:
An easy task; 'tis but to love a king.

LADY GREY:
That's soon perform'd, because I am a subject.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.

LADY GREY:
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
But stay thee, 'tis the fruits of love I mean.

LADY GREY:
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get?

LADY GREY:
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.

KING EDWARD IV:
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.

LADY GREY:
Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.

KING EDWARD IV:
But now you partly may perceive my mind.

LADY GREY:
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.

KING EDWARD IV:
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.

LADY GREY:
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.

LADY GREY:
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;
For by that loss I will not purchase them.

KING EDWARD IV:
Therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily.

LADY GREY:
Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request;
No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.

LADY GREY:
Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

KING EDWARD IV:

LADY GREY:
'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord:
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a sovereign.

KING EDWARD IV:
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
I speak no more than what my soul intends;
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.

LADY GREY:
And that is more than I will yield unto:
I know I am too mean to be your queen,
And yet too good to be your concubine.

KING EDWARD IV:
You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.

LADY GREY:
'Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.

KING EDWARD IV:
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;
And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.

GLOUCESTER:

CLARENCE:

KING EDWARD IV:
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.

GLOUCESTER:
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.

KING EDWARD IV:
You'll think it strange if I should marry her.

CLARENCE:
To whom, my lord?

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, Clarence, to myself.

GLOUCESTER:
That would be ten days' wonder at the least.

CLARENCE:
That's a day longer than a wonder lasts.

GLOUCESTER:
By so much is the wonder in extremes.

KING EDWARD IV:
Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.

Nobleman:
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.

KING EDWARD IV:
See that he be convey'd unto the Tower:
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, Edward will use women honourably.
Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,
To cross me from the golden time I look for!
And yet, between my soul's desire and me--
The lustful Edward's title buried--
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
And all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies,
To take their rooms, ere I can place myself:
A cold premeditation for my purpose!
Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty;
Like one that stands upon a promontory,
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying, he'll lade it dry to have his way:
So do I wish the crown, being so far off;
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;
And so I say, I'll cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard;
What other pleasure can the world afford?
I'll make my heaven in a lady's lap,
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
O miserable thought! and more unlikely
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
Why, love forswore me in my mother's womb:
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe,
To shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub;
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits deformity to mock my body;
To shape my legs of an unequal size;
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlick'd bear-whelp
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,
But to command, to cheque, to o'erbear such
As are of better person than myself,
I'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell,
Until my mis-shaped trunk that bears this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home:
And I,--like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and straying from the way;
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,--
Torment myself to catch the English crown:
And from that torment I will free myself,
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
I'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;
I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk;
I'll play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slily than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
I can add colours to the chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING LEWIS XI:
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state
And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.

QUEEN MARGARET:
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albion's queen in former golden days:
But now mischance hath trod my title down,
And with dishonour laid me on the ground;
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
And to my humble seat conform myself.

KING LEWIS XI:
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?

QUEEN MARGARET:
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.

KING LEWIS XI:
Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side:
Yield not thy neck
To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is of a king become a banish'd man,
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of England's true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henry's heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done:
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help;
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.

KING LEWIS XI:
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,
While we bethink a means to break it off.

QUEEN MARGARET:
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.

KING LEWIS XI:
The more I stay, the more I'll succor thee.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!

KING LEWIS XI:
What's he approacheth boldly to our presence?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.

KING LEWIS XI:
Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise;
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.

WARWICK:
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,
I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person;
And then to crave a league of amity;
And lastly, to confirm that amity
With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To England's king in lawful marriage.

QUEEN MARGARET:

WARWICK:

QUEEN MARGARET:
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edward's well-meant honest love,
But from deceit bred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safely govern home,
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
That Henry liveth still: but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henry's son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

WARWICK:
Injurious Margaret!

PRINCE EDWARD:
And why not queen?

WARWICK:
Because thy father Henry did usurp;
And thou no more are prince than she is queen.

OXFORD:
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France:
From these our Henry lineally descends.

WARWICK:
Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse,
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry Fifth had gotten?
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest, you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years; a silly time
To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.

OXFORD:
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?

WARWICK:
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king.

OXFORD:
Call him my king by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? and more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellow'd years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.

WARWICK:
And I the house of York.

KING LEWIS XI:
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,
While I use further conference with Warwick.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Heavens grant that Warwick's words bewitch him not!

KING LEWIS XI:
Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? for I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.

WARWICK:
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.

KING LEWIS XI:
But is he gracious in the people's eye?

WARWICK:
The more that Henry was unfortunate.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.

WARWICK:
Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fix'd in virtue's ground,
The leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty's sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.

KING LEWIS XI:
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.

BONA:
Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine:
Yet I confess that often ere this day,
When I have heard your king's desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's;
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.

PRINCE EDWARD:
To Edward, but not to the English king.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.

KING LEWIS XI:
And still is friend to him and Margaret:
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edward's good success,
Then 'tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.

WARWICK:
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you;
And better 'twere you troubled him than France.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace,
Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lord's false love;
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.

KING LEWIS XI:
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.

Post:

OXFORD:
I like it well that our fair queen and mistress
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled:
I hope all's for the best.

KING LEWIS XI:
Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.

WARWICK:
Mine, full of sorrow and heart's discontent.

KING LEWIS XI:
What! has your king married the Lady Grey!
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this the alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?

QUEEN MARGARET:
I told your majesty as much before:
This proveth Edward's love and Warwick's honesty.

WARWICK:
King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edward's,
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdon'd at the last with shame?
Shame on himself! for my desert is honour:
And to repair my honour lost for him,
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor:
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love;
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.

WARWICK:
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
I'll undertake to land them on our coast
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
'Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him:
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
He's very likely now to fall from him,
For matching more for wanton lust than honour,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.

BONA:
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?

BONA:
My quarrel and this English queen's are one.

WARWICK:
And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours.

KING LEWIS XI:
And mine with hers, and thine, and Margaret's.
Therefore at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.

KING LEWIS XI:
Then, England's messenger, return in post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride:
Thou seest what's past, go fear thy king withal.

BONA:
Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put armour on.

WARWICK:
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.
There's thy reward: be gone.

KING LEWIS XI:
But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle;
And, as occasion serves, this noble queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt,
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?

WARWICK:
This shall assure my constant loyalty,
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
I'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick;
And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.

KING LEWIS XI:
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral,
Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.
I long till Edward fall by war's mischance,
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.

WARWICK:
I came from Edward as ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal foe:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And I'll be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henry's misery,
But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?

CLARENCE:
Alas, you know, 'tis far from hence to France;
How could he stay till Warwick made return?

SOMERSET:
My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the king.

GLOUCESTER:
And his well-chosen bride.

CLARENCE:
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?

CLARENCE:
As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That they'll take no offence at our abuse.

KING EDWARD IV:
Suppose they take offence without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.

GLOUCESTER:
And shall have your will, because our king:
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.

KING EDWARD IV:
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?

GLOUCESTER:
Not I:
No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd
Whom God hath join'd together; ay, and 'twere pity
To sunder them that yoke so well together.

KING EDWARD IV:
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and England's queen.
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.

CLARENCE:
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy, for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

GLOUCESTER:
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.

KING EDWARD IV:
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?

MONTAGUE:
Yet, to have join'd with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthen'd this our commonwealth
'Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.

HASTINGS:
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?

MONTAGUE:
But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.

HASTINGS:
'Tis better using France than trusting France:
Let us be back'd with God and with the seas
Which He hath given for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves;
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.

CLARENCE:
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.

KING EDWARD IV:
Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant;
And for this once my will shall stand for law.

GLOUCESTER:
And yet methinks your grace hath not done well,
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride;
She better would have fitted me or Clarence:
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.

CLARENCE:
Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

KING EDWARD IV:
Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.

CLARENCE:
In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment,
Which being shallow, you give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.

KING EDWARD IV:
Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king,
And not be tied unto his brother's will.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
My lords, before it pleased his majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right, and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent;
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honours me and mine,
So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.

KING EDWARD IV:
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, messenger, what letters or what news
From France?

Post:
My sovereign liege, no letters; and few words,
But such as I, without your special pardon,
Dare not relate.

KING EDWARD IV:
Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?

Post:
At my depart, these were his very words:
'Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?

Post:
These were her words, utter'd with mad disdain:
'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly,
I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.'

KING EDWARD IV:
I blame not her, she could say little less;
She had the wrong. But what said Henry's queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.

Post:
'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done,
And I am ready to put armour on.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?

Post:
He, more incensed against your majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
'Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.'

KING EDWARD IV:
Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd:
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?

Post:
Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so link'd in
friendship
That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.

CLARENCE:
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter;
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen;
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men, and make prepare for war;
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
Myself in person will straight follow you.
But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance:
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
If it be so, then both depart to him;
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends:
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.

MONTAGUE:
So God help Montague as he proves true!

HASTINGS:
And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause!

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, so! then am I sure of victory.
Now therefore let us hence; and lose no hour,
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
But see where Somerset and Clarence come!
Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?

CLARENCE:
Fear not that, my lord.

WARWICK:
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick;
And welcome, Somerset: I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edward's brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings:
But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but, in night's coverture,
Thy brother being carelessly encamp'd,
His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy:
That as Ulysses and stout Diomede
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus' tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well cover'd with the night's black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edward's guard
And seize himself; I say not, slaughter him,
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
Why, then, let's on our way in silent sort:
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
3 KING HENRY VI

First Watchman:
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand:
The king by this is set him down to sleep.

Second Watchman:
What, will he not to bed?

First Watchman:
Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.

Second Watchman:
To-morrow then belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.

Third Watchman:
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the king here resteth in his tent?

First Watchman:
'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend.

Third Watchman:
O, is it so? But why commands the king
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?

Second Watchman:
'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.

Third Watchman:
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
I like it better than a dangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.

First Watchman:
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.

Second Watchman:
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent,
But to defend his person from night-foes?

WARWICK:
This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.
Courage, my masters! honour now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

First Watchman:
Who goes there?

Second Watchman:
Stay, or thou diest!

SOMERSET:
What are they that fly there?

WARWICK:
Richard and Hastings: let them go; here is The duke.

KING EDWARD IV:
The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
Thou call'dst me king.

WARWICK:
Ay, but the case is alter'd:
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas! how should you govern any kingdom,
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the people's welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?

KING EDWARD IV:
Yea, brother of Clarence, are thou here too?
Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king:
Though fortune's malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.

WARWICK:
Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king:
But Henry now shall wear the English crown,
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
I'll follow you, and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.

KING EDWARD IV:
What fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

OXFORD:
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
But march to London with our soldiers?

WARWICK:
Ay, that's the first thing that we have to do;
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.
3 KING HENRY VI

RIVERS:
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befall'n King Edward?

RIVERS:
What! loss of some pitch'd battle against Warwick?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
No, but the loss of his own royal person.

RIVERS:
Then is my sovereign slain?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betray'd by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares:
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwick's brother and by that our foe.

RIVERS:
These news I must confess are full of grief;
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:
Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Till then fair hope must hinder life's decay.
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edward's offspring in my womb:
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortune's cross;
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edward's fruit, true heir to the English crown.

RIVERS:
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
I am inform'd that he comes towards London,
To set the crown once more on Henry's head:
Guess thou the rest; King Edward's friends must down,
But, to prevent the tyrant's violence,--
For trust not him that hath once broken faith,--
I'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary,
To save at least the heir of Edward's right:
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
If Warwick take us we are sure to die.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means
That if about this hour he make his way
Under the colour of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.

Huntsman:
This way, my lord; for this way lies the game.

KING EDWARD IV:
Nay, this way, man: see where the huntsmen stand.
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?

GLOUCESTER:
Brother, the time and case requireth haste:
Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.

KING EDWARD IV:
But whither shall we then?

HASTINGS:
To Lynn, my lord,
And ship from thence to Flanders.

GLOUCESTER:
Well guess'd, believe me; for that was my meaning.

KING EDWARD IV:
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.

GLOUCESTER:
But wherefore stay we? 'tis no time to talk.

KING EDWARD IV:
Huntsman, what say'st thou? wilt thou go along?

Huntsman:
Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Come then, away; let's ha' no more ado.

KING EDWARD IV:
Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwick's frown;
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING HENRY VI:
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat,
And turn'd my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?

Lieutenant:
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns;
But if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your majesty.

KING HENRY VI:
For what, lieutenant? for well using me?
Nay, be thou sure I'll well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure;
Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
Conceive when after many moody thoughts
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.
But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free,
And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer fortune's spite
By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punish'd with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
I here resign my government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.

WARWICK:
Your grace hath still been famed for virtuous;
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
By spying and avoiding fortune's malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars:
Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace,
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.

CLARENCE:
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heavens in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.

WARWICK:
And I choose Clarence only for protector.

KING HENRY VI:
Warwick and Clarence give me both your hands:
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
That no dissension hinder government:
I make you both protectors of this land,
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sin's rebuke and my Creator's praise.

WARWICK:
What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will?

CLARENCE:
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent;
For on thy fortune I repose myself.

WARWICK:
Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content:
We'll yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henry's body, and supply his place;
I mean, in bearing weight of government,
While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor,
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.

CLARENCE:
What else? and that succession be determined.

WARWICK:
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.

KING HENRY VI:
But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
Let me entreat, for I command no more,
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Be sent for, to return from France with speed;
For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.

CLARENCE:
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.

KING HENRY VI:
My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?

SOMERSET:
My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond.

KING HENRY VI:
Come hither, England's hope.
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.

WARWICK:
What news, my friend?

Post:
That Edward is escaped from your brother,
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.

WARWICK:
Unsavoury news! but how made he escape?

Post:
He was convey'd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the bishop's huntsmen rescued him;
For hunting was his daily exercise.

WARWICK:
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore that may betide.

SOMERSET:
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's;
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before 't be long.
As Henry's late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours:
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith we'll send him hence to Brittany,
Till storms be past of civil enmity.

OXFORD:
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.

SOMERSET:
It shall be so; he shall to Brittany.
Come, therefore, let's about it speedily.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henry's regal crown.
Well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas
And brought desired help from Burgundy:
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter, as into our dukedom?

GLOUCESTER:
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.

KING EDWARD IV:
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us:
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.

HASTINGS:
My liege, I'll knock once more to summon them.

Mayor:
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves;
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

KING EDWARD IV:
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.

Mayor:
True, my good lord; I know you for no less.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.

GLOUCESTER:

HASTINGS:
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates; we are King Henry's friends.

Mayor:
Ay, say you so? the gates shall then be open'd.

GLOUCESTER:
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!

HASTINGS:
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So 'twere not 'long of him; but being enter'd,
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.

KING EDWARD IV:
So, master mayor: these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
For Edward will defend the town and thee,
And all those friends that deign to follow me.

GLOUCESTER:
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.

KING EDWARD IV:
Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms?

MONTAGUE:
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.

KING EDWARD IV:
Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forget
Our title to the crown and only claim
Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.

MONTAGUE:
Then fare you well, for I will hence again:
I came to serve a king and not a duke.
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.

KING EDWARD IV:
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhile, and we'll debate
By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.

MONTAGUE:
What talk you of debating? in few words,
If you'll not here proclaim yourself our king,
I'll leave you to your fortune and be gone
To keep them back that come to succor you:
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?

GLOUCESTER:
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?

KING EDWARD IV:
When we grow stronger, then we'll make our claim:
Till then, 'tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.

HASTINGS:
Away with scrupulous wit! now arms must rule.

GLOUCESTER:
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand:
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

KING EDWARD IV:
Then be it as you will; for 'tis my right,
And Henry but usurps the diadem.

MONTAGUE:
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself;
And now will I be Edward's champion.

HASTINGS:
Sound trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaim'd:
Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.

Soldier:
Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God, king of
England and France, and lord of Ireland, &c.

MONTAGUE:
And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.

All:
Long live Edward the Fourth!

KING EDWARD IV:
Thanks, brave Montgomery; and thanks unto you all:
If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.
Now, for this night, let's harbour here in York;
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon,
We'll forward towards Warwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence! how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers: doubt not of the day,
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London;
And many giddy people flock to him.

KING HENRY VI:
Let's levy men, and beat him back again.

CLARENCE:
A little fire is quickly trodden out;
Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.

WARWICK:
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war;
Those will I muster up: and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee:
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton and in Leicestershire, shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou command'st:
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
Farewell, my sovereign.

KING HENRY VI:
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troy's true hope.

CLARENCE:
In sign of truth, I kiss your highness' hand.

KING HENRY VI:
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!

MONTAGUE:
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.

OXFORD:
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.

KING HENRY VI:
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

WARWICK:
Farewell, sweet lords: let's meet at Coventry.

KING HENRY VI:
Here at the palace I will rest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.

EXETER:
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.

KING HENRY VI:
That's not my fear; my meed hath got me fame:
I have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays;
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears;
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
Nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies.
Nor forward of revenge, though they much err'd:
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace:
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.

EXETER:
Hark, hark, my lord! what shouts are these?

KING EDWARD IV:
Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence;
And once again proclaim us King of England.
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow:
Now stops thy spring; my sea sha$l suck them dry,
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower; let him not speak.
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
The sun shines hot; and, if we use delay,
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.

GLOUCESTER:
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares:
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
3 KING HENRY VI

WARWICK:
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?

First Messenger:
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.

WARWICK:
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?

Second Messenger:
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.

WARWICK:
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?

SOMERSET:
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
And do expect him here some two hours hence.

WARWICK:
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.

SOMERSET:
It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies:
The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.

WARWICK:
Who should that be? belike, unlook'd-for friends.

SOMERSET:
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.

KING EDWARD IV:
Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.

GLOUCESTER:
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall!

WARWICK:
O unbid spite! is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?

KING EDWARD IV:
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee,
Call Edward king and at his hands beg mercy?
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.

WARWICK:
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own,
Call Warwick patron and be penitent?
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.

GLOUCESTER:
I thought, at least, he would have said the king;
Or did he make the jest against his will?

WARWICK:
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?

GLOUCESTER:
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give:
I'll do thee service for so good a gift.

WARWICK:
'Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.

KING EDWARD IV:
Why then 'tis mine, if but by Warwick's gift.

WARWICK:
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.

KING EDWARD IV:
But Warwick's king is Edward's prisoner:
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?

GLOUCESTER:
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The king was slily finger'd from the deck!
You left poor Henry at the Bishop's palace,
And, ten to one, you'll meet him in the Tower.

EDWARD:
'Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.

GLOUCESTER:
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down:
Nay, when? strike now, or else the iron cools.

WARWICK:
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,
And with the other fling it at thy face,
Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.

KING EDWARD IV:
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood,
'Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.'

WARWICK:
O cheerful colours! see where Oxford comes!

OXFORD:
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
The gates are open, let us enter too.

KING EDWARD IV:
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array; for they no doubt
Will issue out again and bid us battle:
If not, the city being but of small defence,
We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.

WARWICK:
O, welcome, Oxford! for we want thy help.

MONTAGUE:
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.

KING EDWARD IV:
The harder match'd, the greater victory:
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

SOMERSET:
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!

GLOUCESTER:
Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York;
And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.

WARWICK:
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle;
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brother's love!
Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt, if Warwick call.

CLARENCE:
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee
I will not ruinate my father's house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trow'st thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath:
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthah's, when he sacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brother's hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
With resolution, wheresoe'er I meet thee--
As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends:
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.

GLOUCESTER:
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brotherlike.

WARWICK:
O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!

KING EDWARD IV:
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?

WARWICK:
Alas, I am not coop'd here for defence!
I will away towards Barnet presently,
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou darest.

KING EDWARD IV:
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.
Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
So, lie thou there: die thou, and die our fear;
For Warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.

WARWICK:
Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axe's edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top-branch overpeer'd Jove's spreading tree
And kept low shrubs from winter's powerful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimm'd with death's black veil,
Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun,
To search the secret treasons of the world:
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were liken'd oft to kingly sepulchres;
For who lived king, but I could dig his grave?
And who durst mine when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smear'd in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had.
Even now forsake me, and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my body's length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And, live we how we can, yet die we must.

SOMERSET:
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are.
We might recover all our loss again;
The queen from France hath brought a puissant power:
Even now we heard the news: ah, could'st thou fly!

WARWICK:
Why, then I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile!
Thou lovest me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.

SOMERSET:
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last;
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.'
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished; but at last
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
'O, farewell, Warwick!'

WARWICK:
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves;
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.

OXFORD:
Away, away, to meet the queen's great power!
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But, in the midst of this bright-shining day,
I spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious sun,
Ere he attain his easeful western bed:
I mean, my lords, those powers that the queen
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.

CLARENCE:
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came:
The very beams will dry those vapours up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.

GLOUCESTER:
The queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her:
If she have time to breathe be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.

KING EDWARD IV:
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury:
We, having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way;
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum; cry 'Courage!' and away.
3 KING HENRY VI

QUEEN MARGARET:
Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Is't meet that he
Should leave the helm and like a fearful lad
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmost; what of him?
Our slaughter'd friends the tackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
For once allow'd the skilful pilot's charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
All these the enemies to our poor bark.
Say you can swim; alas, 'tis but a while!
Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink:
Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off,
Or else you famish; that's a threefold death.
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! what cannot be avoided
'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
I speak not this as doubting any here
For did I but suspect a fearful man
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here--as God forbid!--
Let him depart before we need his help.

OXFORD:
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint! why, 'twere perpetual shame.
O brave young prince! thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!

SOMERSET:
And he that will not fight for such a hope.
Go home to bed, and like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Thanks, gentle Somerset; sweet Oxford, thanks.

PRINCE EDWARD:
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.

Messenger:
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand.
Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.

OXFORD:
I thought no less: it is his policy
To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.

SOMERSET:
But he's deceived; we are in readiness.

QUEEN MARGARET:
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.

OXFORD:
Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.

KING EDWARD IV:
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood,
Which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength,
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!

QUEEN MARGARET:
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay; for every word I speak,
Ye see, I drink the water of mine eyes.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe; his state usurp'd,
His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent;
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice: then, in God's name, lords,
Be valiant and give signal to the fight.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.

OXFORD:
For my part, I'll not trouble thee with words.

SOMERSET:
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So part we sadly in this troublous world,
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.

KING EDWARD IV:
Is proclamation made, that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?

GLOUCESTER:
It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes!

KING EDWARD IV:
Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.
What! can so young a thorn begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to?

PRINCE EDWARD:
Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York!
Suppose that I am now my father's mouth;
Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!

GLOUCESTER:
That you might still have worn the petticoat,
And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Let AEsop fable in a winter's night;
His currish riddles sort not with this place.

GLOUCESTER:
By heaven, brat, I'll plague ye for that word.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.

GLOUCESTER:
For God's sake, take away this captive scold.

PRINCE EDWARD:
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.

KING EDWARD IV:
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.

CLARENCE:
Untutor'd lad, thou art too malapert.

PRINCE EDWARD:
I know my duty; you are all undutiful:
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou mis-shapen Dick, I tell ye all
I am your better, traitors as ye are:
And thou usurp'st my father's right and mine.

KING EDWARD IV:
Take that, thou likeness of this railer here.

GLOUCESTER:
Sprawl'st thou? take that, to end thy agony.

CLARENCE:
And there's for twitting me with perjury.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O, kill me too!

GLOUCESTER:
Marry, and shall.

KING EDWARD IV:
Hold, Richard, hold; for we have done too much.

GLOUCESTER:
Why should she live, to fill the world with words?

KING EDWARD IV:
What, doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.

GLOUCESTER:
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother;
I'll hence to London on a serious matter:
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.

CLARENCE:
What? what?

GLOUCESTER:
The Tower, the Tower.

QUEEN MARGARET:
O Ned, sweet Ned! speak to thy mother, boy!
Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
They that stabb'd Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it:
He was a man; this, in respect, a child:
And men ne'er spend their fury on a child.
What's worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak:
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains! bloody cannibals!
How sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd!
You have no children, butchers! if you had,
The thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse:
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!

KING EDWARD IV:
Away with her; go, bear her hence perforce.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,
Here sheathe thy sword, I'll pardon thee my death:
What, wilt thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.

CLARENCE:
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.

QUEEN MARGARET:
Good Clarence, do; sweet Clarence, do thou do it.

CLARENCE:
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?

QUEEN MARGARET:
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself:
'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher,
Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.

KING EDWARD IV:
Away, I say; I charge ye, bear her hence.

QUEEN MARGARET:
So come to you and yours, as to this Prince!

KING EDWARD IV:
Where's Richard gone?

CLARENCE:
To London, all in post; and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

KING EDWARD IV:
He's sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence: discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and let's away to London
And see our gentle queen how well she fares:
By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
3 KING HENRY VI

GLOUCESTER:
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, my good lord:--my lord, I should say rather;
'Tis sin to flatter; 'good' was little better:
'Good Gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike,
And both preposterous; therefore, not 'good lord.'

GLOUCESTER:
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves: we must confer.

KING HENRY VI:
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?

GLOUCESTER:
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.

KING HENRY VI:
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught and kill'd.

GLOUCESTER:
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete,
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.

KING HENRY VI:
I, Daedalus; my poor boy, Icarus;
Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;
The sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy dagger's point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? is't for my life?

GLOUCESTER:
Think'st thou I am an executioner?

KING HENRY VI:
A persecutor, I am sure, thou art:
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then thou art an executioner.

GLOUCESTER:
Thy son I kill'd for his presumption.

KING HENRY VI:
Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand,
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old man's sigh and many a widow's,
And many an orphan's water-standing eye--
Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
And orphans for their parents timeless death--
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shriek'd at thy birth,--an evil sign;
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
The raven rook'd her on the chimney's top,
And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain,
And, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
To signify thou camest to bite the world:
And, if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou camest--

GLOUCESTER:
I'll hear no more: die, prophet in thy speech:
For this amongst the rest, was I ordain'd.

KING HENRY VI:
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
God forgive my sins, and pardon thee!

GLOUCESTER:
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor king's death!
O, may such purple tears be alway shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house!
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither:
I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
Indeed, 'tis true that Henry told me of;
For I have often heard my mother say
I came into the world with my legs forward:
Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste,
And seek their ruin that usurp'd our right?
The midwife wonder'd and the women cried
'O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!'
And so I was; which plainly signified
That I should snarl and bite and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother;
And this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me: I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware; thou keep'st me from the light:
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
For I will buz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
And then, to purge his fear, I'll be thy death.
King Henry and the prince his son are gone:
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
I'll throw thy body in another room
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
3 KING HENRY VI

KING EDWARD IV:
Once more we sit in England's royal throne,
Re-purchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn,
Have we mow'd down, in tops of all their pride!
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renown'd
For hardy and undoubted champions;
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son,
And two Northumberlands; two braver men
Ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound;
With them, the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roar'd.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Have in our armours watch'd the winter's night,
Went all afoot in summer's scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace;
And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.

GLOUCESTER:

KING EDWARD IV:
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen;
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.

CLARENCE:
The duty that I owe unto your majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.

QUEEN ELIZABETH:
Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.

GLOUCESTER:
And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.

KING EDWARD IV:
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.

CLARENCE:
What will your grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the king of France
Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

KING EDWARD IV:
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! farewell sour annoy!
For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.

ARCHIDAMUS:
If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on
the like occasion whereon my services are now on
foot, you shall see, as I have said, great
difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia
means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be
justified in our loves; for indeed--

CAMILLO:
Beseech you,--

ARCHIDAMUS:
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:
we cannot with such magnificence--in so rare--I know
not what to say. We will give you sleepy drinks,
that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience,
may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse
us.

CAMILLO:
You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me
and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.

CAMILLO:
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.
They were trained together in their childhoods; and
there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
which cannot choose but branch now. Since their
more mature dignities and royal necessities made
separation of their society, their encounters,
though not personal, have been royally attorneyed
with interchange of gifts, letters, loving
embassies; that they have seemed to be together,
though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and
embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed
winds. The heavens continue their loves!

ARCHIDAMUS:
I think there is not in the world either malice or
matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable
comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a
gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
into my note.

CAMILLO:
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it
is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the
subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on
crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
see him a man.

ARCHIDAMUS:
Would they else be content to die?

CAMILLO:
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should
desire to live.

ARCHIDAMUS:
If the king had no son, they would desire to live
on crutches till he had one.

POLIXENES:
Nine changes of the watery star hath been
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
Without a burthen: time as long again
Would be find up, my brother, with our thanks;
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one 'We thank you' many thousands moe
That go before it.

LEONTES:
Stay your thanks a while;
And pay them when you part.

POLIXENES:
Sir, that's to-morrow.
I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance
Or breed upon our absence; that may blow
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
'This is put forth too truly:' besides, I have stay'd
To tire your royalty.

LEONTES:
We are tougher, brother,
Than you can put us to't.

POLIXENES:
No longer stay.

LEONTES:
One seven-night longer.

POLIXENES:
Very sooth, to-morrow.

LEONTES:
We'll part the time between's then; and in that
I'll no gainsaying.

POLIXENES:
Press me not, beseech you, so.
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,
So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
'Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder
Were in your love a whip to me; my stay
To you a charge and trouble: to save both,
Farewell, our brother.

LEONTES:
Tongue-tied, our queen?
speak you.

HERMIONE:
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
All in Bohemia's well; this satisfaction
The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him,
He's beat from his best ward.

LEONTES:
Well said, Hermione.

HERMIONE:
To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes,
I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind
What lady-she her lord. You'll stay?

POLIXENES:
No, madam.

HERMIONE:
Nay, but you will?

POLIXENES:
I may not, verily.

HERMIONE:
Verily!
You put me off with limber vows; but I,
Though you would seek to unsphere the
stars with oaths,
Should yet say 'Sir, no going.' Verily,
You shall not go: a lady's 'Verily' 's
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'
One of them you shall be.

POLIXENES:
Your guest, then, madam:
To be your prisoner should import offending;
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish.

HERMIONE:
Not your gaoler, then,
But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:
You were pretty lordings then?

POLIXENES:
We were, fair queen,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day to-morrow as to-day,
And to be boy eternal.

HERMIONE:
Was not my lord
The verier wag o' the two?

POLIXENES:
We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun,
And bleat the one at the other: what we changed
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd
That any did. Had we pursued that life,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd
With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven
Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd
Hereditary ours.

HERMIONE:
By this we gather
You have tripp'd since.

POLIXENES:
O my most sacred lady!
Temptations have since then been born to's; for
In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
Of my young play-fellow.

HERMIONE:
Grace to boot!
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your queen and I are devils: yet go on;
The offences we have made you do we'll answer,
If you first sinn'd with us and that with us
You did continue fault and that you slipp'd not
With any but with us.

LEONTES:
Is he won yet?

HERMIONE:
He'll stay my lord.

LEONTES:
At my request he would not.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
To better purpose.

HERMIONE:
Never?

LEONTES:
Never, but once.

HERMIONE:
What! have I twice said well? when was't before?
I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's
As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages: you may ride's
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
What was my first? it has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?
Nay, let me have't; I long.

LEONTES:
Why, that was when
Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter
'I am yours for ever.'

HERMIONE:
'Tis grace indeed.
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:
The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;
The other for some while a friend.

LEONTES:

MAMILLIUS:
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES:
I' fecks!
Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast
smutch'd thy nose?
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf
Are all call'd neat.--Still virginalling
Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf!
Art thou my calf?

MAMILLIUS:
Yes, if you will, my lord.

LEONTES:
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
To be full like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs; women say so,
That will say anything but were they false
As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
Most dear'st! my collop! Can thy dam?--may't be?--
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicatest with dreams;--how can this be?--
With what's unreal thou coactive art,
And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent
Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
And that to the infection of my brains
And hardening of my brows.

POLIXENES:
What means Sicilia?

HERMIONE:
He something seems unsettled.

POLIXENES:
How, my lord!
What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?

HERMIONE:
You look as if you held a brow of much distraction
Are you moved, my lord?

LEONTES:
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
Will you take eggs for money?

MAMILLIUS:
No, my lord, I'll fight.

LEONTES:
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours?

POLIXENES:
If at home, sir,
He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:
He makes a July's day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.

LEONTES:
So stands this squire
Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
Next to thyself and my young rover, he's
Apparent to my heart.

HERMIONE:
If you would seek us,
We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?

LEONTES:
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,
Be you beneath the sky.
I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
Go to, go to!
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
To her allowing husband!
Gone already!
Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head and
ears a fork'd one!
Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I
Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.
There have been,
Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
And many a man there is, even at this present,
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,
That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence
And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by
Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't
Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for't there is none;
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,
From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly; know't;
It will let in and out the enemy
With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!

MAMILLIUS:
I am like you, they say.

LEONTES:
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?

CAMILLO:
Ay, my good lord.

LEONTES:
Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.

CAMILLO:
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
When you cast out, it still came home.

LEONTES:
Didst note it?

CAMILLO:
He would not stay at your petitions: made
His business more material.

LEONTES:
Didst perceive it?
They're here with me already, whispering, rounding
'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,
When I shall gust it last. How came't, Camillo,
That he did stay?

CAMILLO:
At the good queen's entreaty.

LEONTES:
At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent
But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,
But of the finer natures? by some severals
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? say.

CAMILLO:
Business, my lord! I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer.

LEONTES:
Ha!

CAMILLO:
Stays here longer.

LEONTES:
Ay, but why?

CAMILLO:
To satisfy your highness and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress.

LEONTES:
Satisfy!
The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed
Thy penitent reform'd: but we have been
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.

CAMILLO:
Be it forbid, my lord!

LEONTES:
To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or,
If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course required; or else thou must be counted
A servant grafted in my serious trust
And therein negligent; or else a fool
That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,
And takest it all for jest.

CAMILLO:
My gracious lord,
I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;
In every one of these no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were wilful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Where of the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord,
Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But, beseech your grace,
Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
By its own visage: if I then deny it,
'Tis none of mine.

LEONTES:
Ha' not you seen, Camillo,--
But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,--or heard,--
For to a vision so apparent rumour
Cannot be mute,--or thought,--for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think,--
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.

CAMILLO:
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate were sin
As deep as that, though true.

LEONTES:
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
Of laughing with a sigh?--a note infallible
Of breaking honesty--horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?
Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;
The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;
My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing.

CAMILLO:
Good my lord, be cured
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes;
For 'tis most dangerous.

LEONTES:
Say it be, 'tis true.

CAMILLO:
No, no, my lord.

LEONTES:
It is; you lie, you lie:
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer, that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass.

CAMILLO:
Who does infect her?

LEONTES:
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honour as their profits,
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
His cupbearer,--whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
How I am galled,--mightst bespice a cup,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
Which draught to me were cordial.

CAMILLO:
Sir, my lord,
I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
But with a lingering dram that should not work
Maliciously like poison: but I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
So sovereignly being honourable.
I have loved thee,--

LEONTES:
Make that thy question, and go rot!
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,
Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,
Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?

CAMILLO:
I must believe you, sir:
I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't;
Provided that, when he's removed, your highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours.

LEONTES:
Thou dost advise me
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.

CAMILLO:
My lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant.

LEONTES:
This is all:
Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do't not, thou split'st thine own.

CAMILLO:
I'll do't, my lord.

LEONTES:
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.

CAMILLO:
O miserable lady! But, for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't
Is the obedience to a master, one
Who in rebellion with himself will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't; but since
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,
Let villany itself forswear't. I must
Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain
To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!
Here comes Bohemia.

POLIXENES:
This is strange: methinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day, Camillo.

CAMILLO:
Hail, most royal sir!

POLIXENES:
What is the news i' the court?

CAMILLO:
None rare, my lord.

POLIXENES:
The king hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province and a region
Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customary compliment; when he,
Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
That changeth thus his manners.

CAMILLO:
I dare not know, my lord.

POLIXENES:
How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts;
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
Myself thus alter'd with 't.

CAMILLO:
There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
Of you that yet are well.

POLIXENES:
How! caught of me!
Make me not sighted like the basilisk:
I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but kill'd none so. Camillo,--
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
Our gentry than our parents' noble names,
In whose success we are gentle,--I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not
In ignorant concealment.

CAMILLO:
I may not answer.

POLIXENES:
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!
I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it.

CAMILLO:
Sir, I will tell you;
Since I am charged in honour and by him
That I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly follow'd as
I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
Cry lost, and so good night!

POLIXENES:
On, good Camillo.

CAMILLO:
I am appointed him to murder you.

POLIXENES:
By whom, Camillo?

CAMILLO:
By the king.

POLIXENES:
For what?

CAMILLO:
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen't or been an instrument
To vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen
Forbiddenly.

POLIXENES:
O, then my best blood turn
To an infected jelly and my name
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation to
A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn'd,
Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection
That e'er was heard or read!

CAMILLO:
Swear his thought over
By each particular star in heaven and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his faith and will continue
The standing of his body.

POLIXENES:
How should this grow?

CAMILLO:
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to
Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
Clear them o' the city. For myself, I'll put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;
For, by the honour of my parents, I
Have utter'd truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon
His execution sworn.

POLIXENES:
I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:
Be pilot to me and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,
Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,
Must it be violent, and as he does conceive
He is dishonour'd by a man which ever
Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me:
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo;
I will respect thee as a father if
Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.

CAMILLO:
It is in mine authority to command
The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.

HERMIONE:
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
'Tis past enduring.

First Lady:
Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be your playfellow?

MAMILLIUS:
No, I'll none of you.

First Lady:
Why, my sweet lord?

MAMILLIUS:
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
I were a baby still. I love you better.

Second Lady:
And why so, my lord?

MAMILLIUS:
Not for because
Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with a pen.

Second Lady:
Who taught you this?

MAMILLIUS:
I learnt it out of women's faces. Pray now
What colour are your eyebrows?

First Lady:
Blue, my lord.

MAMILLIUS:
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.

First Lady:
Hark ye;
The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,
If we would have you.

Second Lady:
She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!

HERMIONE:
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
And tell 's a tale.

MAMILLIUS:
Merry or sad shall't be?

HERMIONE:
As merry as you will.

MAMILLIUS:
A sad tale's best for winter: I have one
Of sprites and goblins.

HERMIONE:
Let's have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.

MAMILLIUS:
There was a man--

HERMIONE:
Nay, come, sit down; then on.

MAMILLIUS:
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;
Yond crickets shall not hear it.

HERMIONE:
Come on, then,
And give't me in mine ear.

LEONTES:
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?

First Lord:
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their ships.

LEONTES:
How blest am I
In my just censure, in my true opinion!
Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
Is not infected: but if one present
The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk,
and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander:
There is a plot against my life, my crown;
All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain
Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:
He has discover'd my design, and I
Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
So easily open?

First Lord:
By his great authority;
Which often hath no less prevail'd than so
On your command.

LEONTES:
I know't too well.
Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.

HERMIONE:
What is this? sport?

LEONTES:
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;
Away with him! and let her sport herself
With that she's big with; for 'tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.

HERMIONE:
But I'ld say he had not,
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howe'er you lean to the nayward.

LEONTES:
You, my lords,
Look on her, mark her well; be but about
To say 'she is a goodly lady,' and
The justice of your bearts will thereto add
'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
That calumny doth use--O, I am out--
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's,
When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between
Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
She's an adulteress.

HERMIONE:
Should a villain say so,
The most replenish'd villain in the world,
He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake.

LEONTES:
You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
Should a like language use to all degrees
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said
She's an adulteress; I have said with whom:
More, she's a traitor and Camillo is
A federary with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know herself
But with her most vile principal, that she's
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy
To this their late escape.

HERMIONE:
No, by my life.
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right me throughly then to say
You did mistake.

LEONTES:
No; if I mistake
In those foundations which I build upon,
The centre is not big enough to bear
A school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks.

HERMIONE:
There's some ill planet reigns:
I must be patient till the heavens look
With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
Commonly are; the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
That honourable grief lodged here which burns
Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The king's will be perform'd!

LEONTES:
Shall I be heard?

HERMIONE:
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,
My women may be with me; for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools;
There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
As I come out: this action I now go on
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
I never wish'd to see you sorry; now
I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.

LEONTES:
Go, do our bidding; hence!

First Lord:
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.

ANTIGONUS:
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, your son.

First Lord:
For her, my lord,
I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,
Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
I' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,
In this which you accuse her.

ANTIGONUS:
If it prove
She's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where
I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her;
Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.

LEONTES:
Hold your peaces.

First Lord:
Good my lord,--

ANTIGONUS:
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
You are abused and by some putter-on
That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd,
I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven
The second and the third, nine, and some five;
If this prove true, they'll pay for't:
by mine honour,
I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see,
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;
And I had rather glib myself than they
Should not produce fair issue.

LEONTES:
Cease; no more.
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel't
As you feel doing thus; and see withal
The instruments that feel.

ANTIGONUS:
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty:
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth.

LEONTES:
What! lack I credit?

First Lord:
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
Upon this ground; and more it would content me
To have her honour true than your suspicion,
Be blamed for't how you might.

LEONTES:
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all
Properly ours.

ANTIGONUS:
And I wish, my liege,
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.

LEONTES:
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
Added to their familiarity,
Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,
That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:
Yet, for a greater confirmation,
For in an act of this importance 'twere
Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
Of stuff'd sufficiency: now from the oracle
They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?

First Lord:
Well done, my lord.

LEONTES:
Though I am satisfied and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to the minds of others, such as he
Whose ignorant credulity will not
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us;
We are to speak in public; for this business
Will raise us all.

ANTIGONUS:

PAULINA:
The keeper of the prison, call to him;
let him have knowledge who I am.
Good lady,
No court in Europe is too good for thee;
What dost thou then in prison?
Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?

Gaoler:
For a worthy lady
And one whom much I honour.

PAULINA:
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the queen.

Gaoler:
I may not, madam:
To the contrary I have express commandment.

PAULINA:
Here's ado,
To lock up honesty and honour from
The access of gentle visitors!
Is't lawful, pray you,
To see her women? any of them? Emilia?

Gaoler:
So please you, madam,
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.

PAULINA:
I pray now, call her.
Withdraw yourselves.

Gaoler:
And, madam,
I must be present at your conference.

PAULINA:
Well, be't so, prithee.
Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes colouring.
Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious lady?

EMILIA:
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
Which never tender lady hath born greater,
She is something before her time deliver'd.

PAULINA:
A boy?

EMILIA:
A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty and like to live: the queen receives
Much comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you.'

PAULINA:
I dare be sworn
These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king,
beshrew them!
He must be told on't, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me:
If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister
And never to my red-look'd anger be
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
Commend my best obedience to the queen:
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
I'll show't the king and undertake to be
Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o' the child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades when speaking fails.

EMILIA:
Most worthy madam,
Your honour and your goodness is so evident
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no lady living
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;
Who but to-day hammer'd of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
Lest she should be denied.

PAULINA:
Tell her, Emilia.
I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted
I shall do good.

EMILIA:
Now be you blest for it!
I'll to the queen: please you,
come something nearer.

Gaoler:
Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
Having no warrant.

PAULINA:
You need not fear it, sir:
This child was prisoner to the womb and is
By law and process of great nature thence
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the king nor guilty of,
If any be, the trespass of the queen.

Gaoler:
I do believe it.

PAULINA:
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,
I will stand betwixt you and danger.

LEONTES:
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being,--part o' the cause,
She the adulteress; for the harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again. Who's there?

First Servant:
My lord?

LEONTES:
How does the boy?

First Servant:
He took good rest to-night;
'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.

LEONTES:
To see his nobleness!
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,
Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares.
Fie, fie! no thought of him:
The thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance; let him be
Until a time may serve: for present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she within my power.

First Lord:
You must not enter.

PAULINA:
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous.

ANTIGONUS:
That's enough.

Second Servant:
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded
None should come at him.

PAULINA:
Not so hot, good sir:
I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows by him and do sigh
At each his needless heavings, such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
Do come with words as medicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
That presses him from sleep.

LEONTES:
What noise there, ho?

PAULINA:
No noise, my lord; but needful conference
About some gossips for your highness.

LEONTES:
How!
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me:
I knew she would.

ANTIGONUS:
I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
She should not visit you.

LEONTES:
What, canst not rule her?

PAULINA:
From all dishonesty he can: in this,
Unless he take the course that you have done,
Commit me for committing honour, trust it,
He shall not rule me.

ANTIGONUS:
La you now, you hear:
When she will take the rein I let her run;
But she'll not stumble.

PAULINA:
Good my liege, I come;
And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare
Less appear so in comforting your evils,
Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come
From your good queen.

LEONTES:
Good queen!

PAULINA:
Good queen, my lord,
Good queen; I say good queen;
And would by combat make her good, so were I
A man, the worst about you.

LEONTES:
Force her hence.

PAULINA:
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;
But first I'll do my errand. The good queen,
For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;
Here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.

LEONTES:
Out!
A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:
A most intelligencing bawd!

PAULINA:
Not so:
I am as ignorant in that as you
In so entitling me, and no less honest
Than you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant,
As this world goes, to pass for honest.

LEONTES:
Traitors!
Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.
Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;
Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.

PAULINA:
For ever
Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Takest up the princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon't!

LEONTES:
He dreads his wife.

PAULINA:
So I would you did; then 'twere past all doubt
You'ld call your children yours.

LEONTES:
A nest of traitors!

ANTIGONUS:
I am none, by this good light.

PAULINA:
Nor I, nor any
But one that's here, and that's himself, for he
The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,
His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's;
and will not--
For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
He cannot be compell'd to't--once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound.

LEONTES:
A callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;
It is the issue of Polixenes:
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire!

PAULINA:
It is yours;
And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,
So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little, the whole matter
And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,
The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,
His smiles,
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours
No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her children not her husband's!

LEONTES:
A gross hag
And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
That wilt not stay her tongue.

ANTIGONUS:
Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself
Hardly one subject.

LEONTES:
Once more, take her hence.

PAULINA:
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
Can do no more.

LEONTES:
I'll ha' thee burnt.

PAULINA:
I care not:
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in't. I'll not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours
Of tyranny and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world.

LEONTES:
On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one. Away with her!

PAULINA:
I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.
Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours:
Jove send her
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so: farewell; we are gone.

LEONTES:
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence
And see it instantly consumed with fire;
Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life,
With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse
And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
For thou set'st on thy wife.

ANTIGONUS:
I did not, sir:
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in't.

Lords:
We can: my royal liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.

LEONTES:
You're liars all.

First Lord:
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech you
So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,
As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.

LEONTES:
I am a feather for each wind that blows:
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither;
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
To save this bastard's life,--for 'tis a bastard,
So sure as this beard's grey,
--what will you adventure
To save this brat's life?

ANTIGONUS:
Any thing, my lord,
That my ability may undergo
And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
To save the innocent: any thing possible.

LEONTES:
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.

ANTIGONUS:
I will, my lord.

LEONTES:
Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail
Of any point in't shall not only be
Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place quite out
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to its own protection
And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.

ANTIGONUS:
I swear to do this, though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe:
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say
Casting their savageness aside have done
Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require! And blessing
Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!

LEONTES:
No, I'll not rear
Another's issue.

Servant:
Please your highness, posts
From those you sent to the oracle are come
An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the court.

First Lord:
So please you, sir, their speed
Hath been beyond account.

LEONTES:
Twenty-three days
They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords;
Summon a session, that we may arraign
Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open trial. While she lives
My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.

CLEOMENES:
The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.

DION:
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the celestial habits,
Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly
It was i' the offering!

CLEOMENES:
But of all, the burst
And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.
That I was nothing.

DION:
If the event o' the journey
Prove as successful to the queen,--O be't so!--
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on't.

CLEOMENES:
Great Apollo
Turn all to the best! These proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.

DION:
The violent carriage of it
Will clear or end the business: when the oracle,
Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,
Shall the contents discover, something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses!
And gracious be the issue!

LEONTES:
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
Even pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be clear'd
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
Produce the prisoner.

Officer:
It is his highness' pleasure that the queen
Appear in person here in court. Silence!

LEONTES:
Read the indictment.

Officer:

HERMIONE:
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation and
The testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say 'not guilty:' mine integrity
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
Behold our human actions, as they do,
I doubt not then but innocence shall make
False accusation blush and tyranny
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
Who least will seem to do so, my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than history can pattern, though devised
And play'd to take spectators. For behold me
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
A moiety of the throne a great king's daughter,
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so; since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent I
Have strain'd to appear thus: if one jot beyond
The bound of honour, or in act or will
That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
Cry fie upon my grave!

LEONTES:
I ne'er heard yet
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to perform it first.

HERMIONE:
That's true enough;
Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.

LEONTES:
You will not own it.

HERMIONE:
More than mistress of
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
With whom I am accused, I do confess
I loved him as in honour he required,
With such a kind of love as might become
A lady like me, with a love even such,
So and no other, as yourself commanded:
Which not to have done I think had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd
For me to try how: all I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.

LEONTES:
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have underta'en to do in's absence.

HERMIONE:
Sir,
You speak a language that I understand not:
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which I'll lay down.

LEONTES:
Your actions are my dreams;
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame,--
Those of your fact are so--so past all truth:
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it,--which is, indeed,
More criminal in thee than it,--so thou
Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
Look for no less than death.

HERMIONE:
Sir, spare your threats:
The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
To me can life be no commodity:
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second joy
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barr'd, like one infectious. My third comfort
Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast,
The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,
Haled out to murder: myself on every post
Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred
The child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs
To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
Here to this place, i' the open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,
I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd
Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
'Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all,
I do refer me to the oracle:
Apollo be my judge!

First Lord:
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth,
And in Apollos name, his oracle.

HERMIONE:
The Emperor of Russia was my father:
O that he were alive, and here beholding
His daughter's trial! that he did but see
The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
Of pity, not revenge!

Officer:
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
The seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd
Of great Apollo's priest; and that, since then,
You have not dared to break the holy seal
Nor read the secrets in't.

CLEOMENES:
All this we swear.

LEONTES:
Break up the seals and read.

Officer:

Lords:
Now blessed be the great Apollo!

HERMIONE:
Praised!

LEONTES:
Hast thou read truth?

Officer:
Ay, my lord; even so
As it is here set down.

LEONTES:
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.

Servant:
My lord the king, the king!

LEONTES:
What is the business?

Servant:
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the queen's speed, is gone.

LEONTES:
How! gone!

Servant:
Is dead.

LEONTES:
Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice.
How now there!

PAULINA:
This news is mortal to the queen: look down
And see what death is doing.

LEONTES:
Take her hence:
Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover:
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life.
Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle!
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For, being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command, though I with death and with
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing 't and being done: he, most humane
And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest
Unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here,
Which you knew great, and to the hazard
Of all encertainties himself commended,
No richer than his honour: how he glisters
Thorough my rust! and how his pity
Does my deeds make the blacker!

PAULINA:
Woe the while!
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
Break too.

First Lord:
What fit is this, good lady?

PAULINA:
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
In leads or oils? what old or newer torture
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny
Together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine, O, think what they have done
And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing;
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
And damnable ingrateful: nor was't much,
Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,
To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
To be or none or little; though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:
Nor is't directly laid to thee, the death
Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last,--O lords,
When I have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,
The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,
and vengeance for't
Not dropp'd down yet.

First Lord:
The higher powers forbid!

PAULINA:
I say she's dead; I'll swear't. If word nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,
Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert.

LEONTES:
Go on, go on
Thou canst not speak too much; I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitterest.

First Lord:
Say no more:
Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
I' the boldness of your speech.

PAULINA:
I am sorry for't:
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent. Alas! I have show'd too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd
To the noble heart. What's gone and what's past help
Should be past grief: do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punish'd, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;
I'll not remember you of my own lord,
Who is lost too: take your patience to you,
And I'll say nothing.

LEONTES:
Thou didst speak but well
When most the truth; which I receive much better
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
To the dead bodies of my queen and son:
One grave shall be for both: upon them shall
The causes of their death appear, unto
Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation: so long as nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me
Unto these sorrows.

ANTIGONUS:
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon
The deserts of Bohemia?

Mariner:
Ay, my lord: and fear
We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
And frown upon 's.

ANTIGONUS:
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;
Look to thy bark: I'll not be long before
I call upon thee.

Mariner:
Make your best haste, and go not
Too far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather;
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upon't.

ANTIGONUS:
Go thou away:
I'll follow instantly.

Mariner:
I am glad at heart
To be so rid o' the business.

ANTIGONUS:
Come, poor babe:
I have heard, but not believed,
the spirits o' the dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother
Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another;
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
So fill'd and so becoming: in pure white robes,
Like very sanctity, she did approach
My cabin where I lay; thrice bow'd before me,
And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon
Did this break-from her: 'Good Antigonus,
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,
I prithee, call't. For this ungentle business
Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see
Thy wife Paulina more.' And so, with shrieks
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect myself and thought
This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that
Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well!
There lie, and there thy character: there these;
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine. The storm begins; poor wretch,
That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I
To be by oath enjoin'd to this. Farewell!
The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have
A lullaby too rough: I never saw
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
Well may I get aboard! This is the chase:
I am gone for ever.

Shepherd:
I would there were no age between sixteen and
three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the
rest; for there is nothing in the between but
getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,
stealing, fighting--Hark you now! Would any but
these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty
hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my
best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find
than the master: if any where I have them, 'tis by
the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, an't be thy
will what have we here! Mercy on 's, a barne a very
pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder? A
pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:
though I am not bookish, yet I can read
waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape. This has been
some stair-work, some trunk-work, some
behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this
than the poor thing is here. I'll take it up for
pity: yet I'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed
but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!

Clown:
Hilloa, loa!

Shepherd:
What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk
on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What
ailest thou, man?

Clown:
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the
sky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust
a bodkin's point.

Shepherd:
Why, boy, how is it?

Clown:
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
how it takes up the shore! but that's not the
point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the
ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon
swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a
cork into a hogshead. And then for the
land-service, to see how the bear tore out his
shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said
his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned
it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the
sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared
and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than
the sea or weather.

Shepherd:
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?

Clown:
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these
sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor
the bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at it
now.

Shepherd:
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!

Clown:
I would you had been by the ship side, to have
helped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.

Shepherd:
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,
boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things
dying, I with things newborn. Here's a sight for
thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's
child! look thee here; take up, take up, boy;
open't. So, let's see: it was told me I should be
rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:
open't. What's within, boy?

Clown:
You're a made old man: if the sins of your youth
are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold! all gold!

Shepherd:
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: up
with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.
We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requires
nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good
boy, the next way home.

Clown:
Go you the next way with your findings. I'll go see
if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much
he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they
are hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll bury
it.

Shepherd:
That's a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that
which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the
sight of him.

Clown:
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.

Shepherd:
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.

Time:
I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour
To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancient'st order was
Or what is now received: I witness to
The times that brought them in; so shall I do
To the freshest things now reigning and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my tale
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving,
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son o' the king's, which Florizel
I now name to you; and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering: what of her ensues
I list not prophecy; but let Time's news
Be known when 'tis brought forth.
A shepherd's daughter,
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is the argument of Time. Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
He wishes earnestly you never may.

POLIXENES:
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:
'tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death to
grant this.

CAMILLO:
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though
I have for the most part been aired abroad, I
desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling
sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to
think so, which is another spur to my departure.

POLIXENES:
As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of
thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of
thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to
have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having
made me businesses which none without thee can
sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute
them thyself or take away with thee the very
services thou hast done; which if I have not enough
considered, as too much I cannot, to be more
thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit
therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal
country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very
naming punishes me with the remembrance of that
penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,
my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen
and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my
son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not
being gracious, than they are in losing them when
they have approved their virtues.

CAMILLO:
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. What
his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I
have missingly noted, he is of late much retired
from court and is less frequent to his princely
exercises than formerly he hath appeared.

POLIXENES:
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some
care; so far that I have eyes under my service which
look upon his removedness; from whom I have this
intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a
most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from
very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.

CAMILLO:
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a
daughter of most rare note: the report of her is
extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.

POLIXENES:
That's likewise part of my intelligence; but, I
fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou
shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not
appearing what we are, have some question with the
shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not
uneasy to get the cause of my son's resort thither.
Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and
lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
I willingly obey your command.

POLIXENES:
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.

AUTOLYCUS:
When daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year;
For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge;
For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
The lark, that tirra-lyra chants,
With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizel and in my time
wore three-pile; but now I am out of service:
But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
The pale moon shines by night:
And when I wander here and there,
I then do most go right.
If tinkers may have leave to live,
And bear the sow-skin budget,
Then my account I well may, give,
And in the stocks avouch it.
My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to
lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who
being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise
a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and
drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is
the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful
on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to
me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought
of it. A prize! a prize!

Clown:
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod
yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred
shorn. what comes the wool to?

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see; what am
I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound
of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,--what will
this sister of mine do with rice? But my father
hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it
on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for
the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good
ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but
one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to
horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden
pies; mace; dates?--none, that's out of my note;
nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I
may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
raisins o' the sun.

AUTOLYCUS:
O that ever I was born!

Clown:
I' the name of me--

AUTOLYCUS:
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and
then, death, death!

Clown:
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay
on thee, rather than have these off.

AUTOLYCUS:
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more
than the stripes I have received, which are mighty
ones and millions.

Clown:
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a
great matter.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel
ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon
me.

Clown:
What, by a horseman, or a footman?

AUTOLYCUS:
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.

Clown:
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he
has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat,
it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,
I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.

AUTOLYCUS:
O, good sir, tenderly, O!

Clown:
Alas, poor soul!

AUTOLYCUS:
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my
shoulder-blade is out.

Clown:
How now! canst stand?

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.

AUTOLYCUS:
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I have
a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,
unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, or
any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;
that kills my heart.

Clown:
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?

AUTOLYCUS:
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with
troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the
prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his
virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.

Clown:
His vices, you would say; there's no virtue whipped
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay
there; and yet it will no more but abide.

AUTOLYCUS:
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he
hath been since an ape-bearer; then a
process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a
motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinker's
wife within a mile where my land and living lies;
and, having flown over many knavish professions, he
settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.

Clown:
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts
wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.

AUTOLYCUS:
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that
put me into this apparel.

Clown:
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had
but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.

AUTOLYCUS:
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am
false of heart that way; and that he knew, I warrant
him.

Clown:
How do you now?

AUTOLYCUS:
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and
walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace
softly towards my kinsman's.

Clown:
Shall I bring thee on the way?

AUTOLYCUS:
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.

Clown:
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our
sheep-shearing.

AUTOLYCUS:
Prosper you, sweet sir!
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if I
make not this cheat bring out another and the
shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name
put in the book of virtue!
Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,
And merrily hent the stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tires in a mile-a.

FLORIZEL:
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
And you the queen on't.

PERDITA:
Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:
O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured
With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like prank'd up: but that our feasts
In every mess have folly and the feeders
Digest it with a custom, I should blush
To see you so attired, sworn, I think,
To show myself a glass.

FLORIZEL:
I bless the time
When my good falcon made her flight across
Thy father's ground.

PERDITA:
Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
To think your father, by some accident,
Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates!
How would he look, to see his work so noble
Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold
The sternness of his presence?

FLORIZEL:
Apprehend
Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
Humbling their deities to love, have taken
The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter
Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune
A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
Burn hotter than my faith.

PERDITA:
O, but, sir,
Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis
Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must
change this purpose,
Or I my life.

FLORIZEL:
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not
The mirth o' the feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
Or not my father's. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle;
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial which
We two have sworn shall come.

PERDITA:
O lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious!

FLORIZEL:
See, your guests approach:
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And let's be red with mirth.

Shepherd:
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,
At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
With labour and the thing she took to quench it,
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one and not
The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid
These unknown friends to's welcome; for it is
A way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.

PERDITA:

POLIXENES:
Shepherdess,
A fair one are you--well you fit our ages
With flowers of winter.

PERDITA:
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest
flowers o' the season
Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,
Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind
Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not
To get slips of them.

POLIXENES:
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them?

PERDITA:
For I have heard it said
There is an art which in their piedness shares
With great creating nature.

POLIXENES:
Say there be;
Yet nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean: so, over that art
Which you say adds to nature, is an art
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race: this is an art
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
The art itself is nature.

PERDITA:
So it is.

POLIXENES:
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And do not call them bastards.

PERDITA:
I'll not put
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
No more than were I painted I would wish
This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you;
Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;
The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun
And with him rises weeping: these are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. You're very welcome.

CAMILLO:
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.

PERDITA:
Out, alas!
You'd be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through.
Now, my fair'st friend,
I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might
Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall
From Dis's waggon! daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bight Phoebus in his strength--a malady
Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er and o'er!

FLORIZEL:
What, like a corse?

PERDITA:
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers:
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine
Does change my disposition.

FLORIZEL:
What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.
I'ld have you do it ever: when you sing,
I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,
To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you
A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that; move still, still so,
And own no other function: each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
That all your acts are queens.

PERDITA:
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth,
And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You woo'd me the false way.

FLORIZEL:
I think you have
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
To put you to't. But come; our dance, I pray:
Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,
That never mean to part.

PERDITA:
I'll swear for 'em.

POLIXENES:
This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place.

CAMILLO:
He tells her something
That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is
The queen of curds and cream.

Clown:
Come on, strike up!

DORCAS:
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,
To mend her kissing with!

MOPSA:
Now, in good time!

Clown:
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up!

POLIXENES:
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
Which dances with your daughter?

Shepherd:
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding: but I have it
Upon his own report and I believe it;
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter:
I think so too; for never gazed the moon
Upon the water as he'll stand and read
As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain.
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.

POLIXENES:
She dances featly.

Shepherd:
So she does any thing; though I report it,
That should be silent: if young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.

Servant:
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the
door, you would never dance again after a tabour and
pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings
several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he
utters them as he had eaten ballads and all men's
ears grew to his tunes.

Clown:
He could never come better; he shall come in. I
love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful
matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
indeed and sung lamentably.

Servant:
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no
milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he
has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without
bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate
burthens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump
her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,
as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into
the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'Whoop, do me
no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with
'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'

POLIXENES:
This is a brave fellow.

Clown:
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited
fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?

Servant:
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow;
points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can
learnedly handle, though they come to him by the
gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he
sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you
would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants
to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.

Clown:
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.

PERDITA:
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.

Clown:
You have of these pedlars, that have more in them
than you'ld think, sister.

PERDITA:
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.

AUTOLYCUS:
Lawn as white as driven snow;
Cyprus black as e'er was crow;
Gloves as sweet as damask roses;
Masks for faces and for noses;
Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
Perfume for a lady's chamber;
Golden quoifs and stomachers,
For my lads to give their dears:
Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
What maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.

Clown:
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take
no money of me; but being enthralled as I am, it
will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.

MOPSA:
I was promised them against the feast; but they come
not too late now.

DORCAS:
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.

MOPSA:
He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he has
paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.

Clown:
Is there no manners left among maids? will they
wear their plackets where they should bear their
faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are
going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these
secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all
our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour
your tongues, and not a word more.

MOPSA:
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace
and a pair of sweet gloves.

Clown:
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
and lost all my money?

AUTOLYCUS:
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;
therefore it behoves men to be wary.

Clown:
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.

AUTOLYCUS:
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.

Clown:
What hast here? ballads?

MOPSA:
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o'
life, for then we are sure they are true.

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's
wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a
burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and
toads carbonadoed.

MOPSA:
Is it true, think you?

AUTOLYCUS:
Very true, and but a month old.

DORCAS:
Bless me from marrying a usurer!

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress
Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were
present. Why should I carry lies abroad?

MOPSA:
Pray you now, buy it.

Clown:
Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moe
ballads; we'll buy the other things anon.

AUTOLYCUS:
Here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon
the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,
forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this
ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was
thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold
fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that
loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.

DORCAS:
Is it true too, think you?

AUTOLYCUS:
Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more than
my pack will hold.

Clown:
Lay it by too: another.

AUTOLYCUS:
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.

MOPSA:
Let's have some merry ones.

AUTOLYCUS:
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to
the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there's
scarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis in
request, I can tell you.

MOPSA:
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou
shalt hear; 'tis in three parts.

DORCAS:
We had the tune on't a month ago.

AUTOLYCUS:
I can bear my part; you must know 'tis my
occupation; have at it with you.

AUTOLYCUS:
Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know.

DORCAS:
Whither?

MOPSA:
O, whither?

DORCAS:
Whither?

MOPSA:
It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.

DORCAS:
Me too, let me go thither.

MOPSA:
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.

DORCAS:
If to either, thou dost ill.

AUTOLYCUS:
Neither.

DORCAS:
What, neither?

AUTOLYCUS:
Neither.

DORCAS:
Thou hast sworn my love to be.

MOPSA:
Thou hast sworn it more to me:
Then whither goest? say, whither?

Clown:
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves: my
father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll
not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after
me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's
have the first choice. Follow me, girls.

AUTOLYCUS:
And you shall pay well for 'em.
Will you buy any tape,
Or lace for your cape,
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
Any silk, any thread,
Any toys for your head,
Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a?
Come to the pedlar;
Money's a medler.
That doth utter all men's ware-a.

Servant:
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,
three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made
themselves all men of hair, they call themselves
Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches
say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are
not in't; but they themselves are o' the mind, if it
be not too rough for some that know little but
bowling, it will please plentifully.

Shepherd:
Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too much
homely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.

POLIXENES:
You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's see
these four threes of herdsmen.

Servant:
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath
danced before the king; and not the worst of the
three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.

Shepherd:
Leave your prating: since these good men are
pleased, let them come in; but quickly now.

Servant:
Why, they stay at door, sir.

POLIXENES:
O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.
Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
He's simple and tells much.
How now, fair shepherd!
Your heart is full of something that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
And handed love as you do, I was wont
To load my she with knacks: I would have ransack'd
The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it
To her acceptance; you have let him go
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
Interpretation should abuse and call this
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
For a reply, at least if you make a care
Of happy holding her.

FLORIZEL:
Old sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd
Up in my heart; which I have given already,
But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd
snow that's bolted
By the northern blasts twice o'er.

POLIXENES:
What follows this?
How prettily the young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before! I have put you out:
But to your protestation; let me hear
What you profess.

FLORIZEL:
Do, and be witness to 't.

POLIXENES:
And this my neighbour too?

FLORIZEL:
And he, and more
Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:
That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
Without her love; for her employ them all;
Commend them and condemn them to her service
Or to their own perdition.

POLIXENES:
Fairly offer'd.

CAMILLO:
This shows a sound affection.

Shepherd:
But, my daughter,
Say you the like to him?

PERDITA:
I cannot speak
So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
The purity of his.

Shepherd:
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her portion equal his.

FLORIZEL:
O, that must be
I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,
Contract us 'fore these witnesses.

Shepherd:
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.

POLIXENES:
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
Have you a father?

FLORIZEL:
I have: but what of him?

POLIXENES:
Knows he of this?

FLORIZEL:
He neither does nor shall.

POLIXENES:
Methinks a father
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear?
Know man from man? dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing
But what he did being childish?

FLORIZEL:
No, good sir;
He has his health and ampler strength indeed
Than most have of his age.

POLIXENES:
By my white beard,
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Something unfilial: reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The father, all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
In such a business.

FLORIZEL:
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
My father of this business.

POLIXENES:
Let him know't.

FLORIZEL:
He shall not.

POLIXENES:
Prithee, let him.

FLORIZEL:
No, he must not.

Shepherd:
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.

FLORIZEL:
Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract.

POLIXENES:
Mark your divorce, young sir,
Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
To be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir,
That thus affect'st a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor,
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
The royal fool thou copest with,--

Shepherd:
O, my heart!

POLIXENES:
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made
More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never
I mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession;
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:
Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment.--
Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,
That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
Unworthy thee,--if ever henceforth thou
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to't.

PERDITA:
Even here undone!
I was not much afeard; for once or twice
I was about to speak and tell him plainly,
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage but
Looks on alike. Will't please you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would come of this: beseech you,
Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,--
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes and weep.

CAMILLO:
Why, how now, father!
Speak ere thou diest.

Shepherd:
I cannot speak, nor think
Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir!
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones: but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was the prince,
and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.

FLORIZEL:
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,
But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am;
More straining on for plucking back, not following
My leash unwillingly.

CAMILLO:
Gracious my lord,
You know your father's temper: at this time
He will allow no speech, which I do guess
You do not purpose to him; and as hardly
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
Come not before him.

FLORIZEL:
I not purpose it.
I think, Camillo?

CAMILLO:
Even he, my lord.

PERDITA:
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
How often said, my dignity would last
But till 'twere known!

FLORIZEL:
It cannot fail but by
The violation of my faith; and then
Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me, father; I
Am heir to my affection.

CAMILLO:
Be advised.

FLORIZEL:
I am, and by my fancy: if my reason
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.

CAMILLO:
This is desperate, sir.

FLORIZEL:
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or
The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved: therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
When he shall miss me,--as, in faith, I mean not
To see him any more,--cast your good counsels
Upon his passion; let myself and fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know
And so deliver, I am put to sea
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;
And most opportune to our need I have
A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.

CAMILLO:
O my lord!
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.

FLORIZEL:
Hark, Perdita
I'll hear you by and by.

CAMILLO:
He's irremoveable,
Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if
His going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
I so much thirst to see.

FLORIZEL:
Now, good Camillo;
I am so fraught with curious business that
I leave out ceremony.

CAMILLO:
Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, i' the love
That I have borne your father?

FLORIZEL:
Very nobly
Have you deserved: it is my father's music
To speak your deeds, not little of his care
To have them recompensed as thought on.

CAMILLO:
Well, my lord,
If you may please to think I love the king
And through him what is nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction:
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your highness; where you may
Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
There's no disjunction to be made, but by--
As heavens forefend!--your ruin; marry her,
And, with my best endeavours in your absence,
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.

FLORIZEL:
How, Camillo,
May this, almost a miracle, be done?
That I may call thee something more than man
And after that trust to thee.

CAMILLO:
Have you thought on
A place whereto you'll go?

FLORIZEL:
Not any yet:
But as the unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
Of every wind that blows.

CAMILLO:
Then list to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself and your fair princess,
For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness,
As 'twere i' the father's person; kisses the hands
Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him
'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one
He chides to hell and bids the other grow
Faster than thought or time.

FLORIZEL:
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my visitation shall I
Hold up before him?

CAMILLO:
Sent by the king your father
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you as from your father shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down:
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say; that he shall not perceive
But that you have your father's bosom there
And speak his very heart.

FLORIZEL:
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.

CAMILLO:
A cause more promising
Than a wild dedication of yourselves
To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain
To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one to take another;
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
Do their best office, if they can but stay you
Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know
Prosperity's the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
Affliction alters.

PERDITA:
One of these is true:
I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind.

CAMILLO:
Yea, say you so?
There shall not at your father's house these
seven years
Be born another such.

FLORIZEL:
My good Camillo,
She is as forward of her breeding as
She is i' the rear our birth.

CAMILLO:
I cannot say 'tis pity
She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
To most that teach.

PERDITA:
Your pardon, sir; for this
I'll blush you thanks.

FLORIZEL:
My prettiest Perdita!
But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.

CAMILLO:
My lord,
Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care
To have you royally appointed as if
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want, one word.

AUTOLYCUS:
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his
sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold
all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a
ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,
knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,
to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who
should buy first, as if my trinkets had been
hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:
by which means I saw whose purse was best in
picture; and what I saw, to my good use I
remembered. My clown, who wants but something to
be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the
wenches' song, that he would not stir his pettitoes
till he had both tune and words; which so drew the
rest of the herd to me that all their other senses
stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it
was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a
purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in
chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song,
and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this
time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their
festival purses; and had not the old man come in
with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the king's
son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not
left a purse alive in the whole army.

CAMILLO:
Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.

FLORIZEL:
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes--

CAMILLO:
Shall satisfy your father.

PERDITA:
Happy be you!
All that you speak shows fair.

CAMILLO:
Who have we here?
We'll make an instrument of this, omit
Nothing may give us aid.

AUTOLYCUS:
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.

CAMILLO:
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear
not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am a poor fellow, sir.

CAMILLO:
Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from
thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must
make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly,
--thou must think there's a necessity in't,--and
change garments with this gentleman: though the
pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee,
there's some boot.

AUTOLYCUS:
I am a poor fellow, sir.
I know ye well enough.

CAMILLO:
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half
flayed already.

AUTOLYCUS:
Are you in earnest, sir?
I smell the trick on't.

FLORIZEL:
Dispatch, I prithee.

AUTOLYCUS:
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with
conscience take it.

CAMILLO:
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate mistress,--let my prophecy
Come home to ye!--you must retire yourself
Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat
And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
The truth of your own seeming; that you may--
For I do fear eyes over--to shipboard
Get undescried.

PERDITA:
I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part.

CAMILLO:
No remedy.
Have you done there?

FLORIZEL:
Should I now meet my father,
He would not call me son.

CAMILLO:
Nay, you shall have no hat.
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.

AUTOLYCUS:
Adieu, sir.

FLORIZEL:
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!
Pray you, a word.

CAMILLO:

FLORIZEL:
Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.

CAMILLO:
The swifter speed the better.

AUTOLYCUS:
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an
open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is
necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite
also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see
this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.
What an exchange had this been without boot! What
a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do
this year connive at us, and we may do any thing
extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of
iniquity, stealing away from his father with his
clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of
honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not
do't: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;
and therein am I constant to my profession.
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:
every lane's end, every shop, church, session,
hanging, yields a careful man work.

Clown:
See, see; what a man you are now!
There is no other way but to tell the king
she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.

Shepherd:
Nay, but hear me.

Clown:
Nay, but hear me.

Shepherd:
Go to, then.

Clown:
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh
and blood has not offended the king; and so your
flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show
those things you found about her, those secret
things, all but what she has with her: this being
done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.

Shepherd:
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his
son's pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man,
neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make
me the king's brother-in-law.

Clown:
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you
could have been to him and then your blood had been
the dearer by I know how much an ounce.

AUTOLYCUS:

Shepherd:
Well, let us to the king: there is that in this
fardel will make him scratch his beard.

AUTOLYCUS:

Clown:
Pray heartily he be at palace.

AUTOLYCUS:

Shepherd:
To the palace, an it like your worship.

AUTOLYCUS:
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition
of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your
names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any
thing that is fitting to be known, discover.

Clown:
We are but plain fellows, sir.

AUTOLYCUS:
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have no
lying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and they
often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for
it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore
they do not give us the lie.

Clown:
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you
had not taken yourself with the manner.

Shepherd:
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest
thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
receives not thy nose court-odor from me? reflect I
not on thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkest thou,
for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy
business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier
cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck
back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to
open thy affair.

Shepherd:
My business, sir, is to the king.

AUTOLYCUS:
What advocate hast thou to him?

Shepherd:
I know not, an't like you.

Clown:
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say you
have none.

Shepherd:
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.

AUTOLYCUS:
How blessed are we that are not simple men!
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.

Clown:
This cannot be but a great courtier.

Shepherd:
His garments are rich, but he wears
them not handsomely.

Clown:
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
a great man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking
on's teeth.

AUTOLYCUS:
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?
Wherefore that box?

Shepherd:
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,
which none must know but the king; and which he
shall know within this hour, if I may come to the
speech of him.

AUTOLYCUS:
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.

Shepherd:
Why, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a
new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,
if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must
know the king is full of grief.

Shepard:
So 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should have
married a shepherd's daughter.

AUTOLYCUS:
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:
the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall
feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.

Clown:
Think you so, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy
and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to
him, though removed fifty times, shall all come
under the hangman: which though it be great pity,
yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a
ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into
grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that death
is too soft for him, say I draw our throne into a
sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.

Clown:
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear. an't
like you, sir?

AUTOLYCUS:
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then
'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a
wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters
and a dram dead; then recovered again with
aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as
he is, and in the hottest day prognostication
proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the
sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he
is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what
talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries
are to be smiled at, their offences being so
capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain
men, what you have to the king: being something
gently considered, I'll bring you where he is
aboard, tender your persons to his presence,
whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man
besides the king to effect your suits, here is man
shall do it.

Clown:
He seems to be of great authority: close with him,
give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn
bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show
the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,
and no more ado. Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'

Shepherd:
An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for
us, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as much
more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.

AUTOLYCUS:
After I have done what I promised?

Shepherd:
Ay, sir.

AUTOLYCUS:
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?

Clown:
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful
one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.

AUTOLYCUS:
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,
he'll be made an example.

Clown:
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show
our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your
daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I
will give you as much as this old man does when the
business is performed, and remain, as he says, your
pawn till it be brought you.

AUTOLYCUS:
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;
go on the right hand: I will but look upon the
hedge and follow you.

Clown:
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.

Shepherd:
Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.

AUTOLYCUS:
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would
not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am
courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means
to do the prince my master good; which who knows how
that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring
these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him: if he
think it fit to shore them again and that the
complaint they have to the king concerns him
nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far
officious; for I am proof against that title and
what shame else belongs to't. To him will I present
them: there may be matter in it.

CLEOMENES:
Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd
A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make,
Which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down
More penitence than done trespass: at the last,
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil;
With them forgive yourself.

LEONTES:
Whilst I remember
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did myself; which was so much,
That heirless it hath made my kingdom and
Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
Bred his hopes out of.

PAULINA:
True, too true, my lord:
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
Or from the all that are took something good,
To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd
Would be unparallel'd.

LEONTES:
I think so. Kill'd!
She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me
Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter
Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now,
Say so but seldom.

CLEOMENES:
Not at all, good lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things that would
Have done the time more benefit and graced
Your kindness better.

PAULINA:
You are one of those
Would have him wed again.

DION:
If you would not so,
You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
Of his most sovereign name; consider little
What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom and devour
Incertain lookers on. What were more holy
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royalty's repair,
For present comfort and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
With a sweet fellow to't?

PAULINA:
There is none worthy,
Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Is't not the tenor of his oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir
Till his lost child be found? which that it shall,
Is all as monstrous to our human reason
As my Antigonus to break his grave
And come again to me; who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills.
Care not for issue;
The crown will find an heir: great Alexander
Left his to the worthiest; so his successor
Was like to be the best.

LEONTES:
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
I know, in honour, O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,
I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,
Have taken treasure from her lips--

PAULINA:
And left them
More rich for what they yielded.

LEONTES:
Thou speak'st truth.
No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse,
And better used, would make her sainted spirit
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd,
And begin, 'Why to me?'

PAULINA:
Had she such power,
She had just cause.

LEONTES:
She had; and would incense me
To murder her I married.

PAULINA:
I should so.
Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'ld bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
You chose her; then I'ld shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd
Should be 'Remember mine.'

LEONTES:
Stars, stars,
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
I'll have no wife, Paulina.

PAULINA:
Will you swear
Never to marry but by my free leave?

LEONTES:
Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!

PAULINA:
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.

CLEOMENES:
You tempt him over-much.

PAULINA:
Unless another,
As like Hermione as is her picture,
Affront his eye.

CLEOMENES:
Good madam,--

PAULINA:
I have done.
Yet, if my lord will marry,--if you will, sir,
No remedy, but you will,--give me the office
To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former; but she shall be such
As, walk'd your first queen's ghost,
it should take joy
To see her in your arms.

LEONTES:
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.

PAULINA:
That
Shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
Never till then.

Gentleman:
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she
The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access
To your high presence.

LEONTES:
What with him? he comes not
Like to his father's greatness: his approach,
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
'Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
By need and accident. What train?

Gentleman:
But few,
And those but mean.

LEONTES:
His princess, say you, with him?

Gentleman:
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That e'er the sun shone bright on.

PAULINA:
O Hermione,
As every present time doth boast itself
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
Have said and writ so, but your writing now
Is colder than that theme, 'She had not been,
Nor was not to be equall'd;'--thus your verse
Flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
To say you have seen a better.

Gentleman:
Pardon, madam:
The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,--
The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Of all professors else, make proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.

PAULINA:
How! not women?

Gentleman:
Women will love her, that she is a woman
More worth than any man; men, that she is
The rarest of all women.

LEONTES:
Go, Cleomenes;
Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,
Bring them to our embracement. Still, 'tis strange
He thus should steal upon us.

PAULINA:
Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd
Well with this lord: there was not full a month
Between their births.

LEONTES:
Prithee, no more; cease; thou know'st
He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure,
When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that which may
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;
For she did print your royal father off,
Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one,
Your father's image is so hit in you,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us perform'd before. Most dearly welcome!
And your fair princess,--goddess!--O, alas!
I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth
Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost--
All mine own folly--the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
Though bearing misery, I desire my life
Once more to look on him.

FLORIZEL:
By his command
Have I here touch'd Sicilia and from him
Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother: and, but infirmity
Which waits upon worn times hath something seized
His wish'd ability, he had himself
The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
Measured to look upon you; whom he loves--
He bade me say so--more than all the sceptres
And those that bear them living.

LEONTES:
O my brother,
Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir
Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither,
As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too
Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
The adventure of her person?

FLORIZEL:
Good my lord,
She came from Libya.

LEONTES:
Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?

FLORIZEL:
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter
His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: thence,
A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,
To execute the charge my father gave me
For visiting your highness: my best train
I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya, sir,
But my arrival and my wife's in safety
Here where we are.

LEONTES:
The blessed gods
Purge all infection from our air whilst you
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
A graceful gentleman; against whose person,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin:
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,
As he from heaven merits it, with you
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,
Such goodly things as you!

Lord:
Most noble sir,
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
Desires you to attach his son, who has--
His dignity and duty both cast off--
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
A shepherd's daughter.

LEONTES:
Where's Bohemia? speak.

Lord:
Here in your city; I now came from him:
I speak amazedly; and it becomes
My marvel and my message. To your court
Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,
Of this fair couple, meets he on the way
The father of this seeming lady and
Her brother, having both their country quitted
With this young prince.

FLORIZEL:
Camillo has betray'd me;
Whose honour and whose honesty till now
Endured all weathers.

Lord:
Lay't so to his charge:
He's with the king your father.

LEONTES:
Who? Camillo?

Lord:
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With divers deaths in death.

PERDITA:
O my poor father!
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
Our contract celebrated.

LEONTES:
You are married?

FLORIZEL:
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:
The odds for high and low's alike.

LEONTES:
My lord,
Is this the daughter of a king?

FLORIZEL:
She is,
When once she is my wife.

LEONTES:
That 'once' I see by your good father's speed
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.

FLORIZEL:
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
Should chase us with my father, power no jot
Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir,
Remember since you owed no more to time
Than I do now: with thought of such affections,
Step forth mine advocate; at your request
My father will grant precious things as trifles.

LEONTES:
Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,
Which he counts but a trifle.

PAULINA:
Sir, my liege,
Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month
'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
Than what you look on now.

LEONTES:
I thought of her,
Even in these looks I made.
But your petition
Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father:
Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
I am friend to them and you: upon which errand
I now go toward him; therefore follow me
And mark what way I make: come, good my lord.

AUTOLYCUS:
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?

First Gentleman:
I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old
shepherd deliver the manner how he found it:
whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all
commanded out of the chamber; only this methought I
heard the shepherd say, he found the child.

AUTOLYCUS:
I would most gladly know the issue of it.

First Gentleman:
I make a broken delivery of the business; but the
changes I perceived in the king and Camillo were
very notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with
staring on one another, to tear the cases of their
eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language
in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard
of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable
passion of wonder appeared in them; but the wisest
beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not
say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the
extremity of the one, it must needs be.
Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
The news, Rogero?

Second Gentleman:
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; the
king's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is
broken out within this hour that ballad-makers
cannot be able to express it.
Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he can
deliver you more. How goes it now, sir? this news
which is called true is so like an old tale, that
the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king
found his heir?

Third Gentleman:
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by
circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you
see, there is such unity in the proofs. The mantle
of Queen Hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it,
the letters of Antigonus found with it which they
know to be his character, the majesty of the
creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection
of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding,
and many other evidences proclaim her with all
certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see
the meeting of the two kings?

Second Gentleman:
No.

Third Gentleman:
Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen,
cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one
joy crown another, so and in such manner that it
seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their
joy waded in tears. There was casting up of eyes,
holding up of hands, with countenances of such
distraction that they were to be known by garment,
not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out of
himself for joy of his found daughter, as if that
joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother,
thy mother!' then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then
embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his
daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old
shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten
conduit of many kings' reigns. I never heard of such
another encounter, which lames report to follow it
and undoes description to do it.

Second Gentleman:
What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried
hence the child?

Third Gentleman:
Like an old tale still, which will have matter to
rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear
open. He was torn to pieces with a bear: this
avouches the shepherd's son; who has not only his
innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a
handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.

First Gentleman:
What became of his bark and his followers?

Third Gentleman:
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death and
in the view of the shepherd: so that all the
instruments which aided to expose the child were
even then lost when it was found. But O, the noble
combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in
Paulina! She had one eye declined for the loss of
her husband, another elevated that the oracle was
fulfilled: she lifted the princess from the earth,
and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin
her to her heart that she might no more be in danger
of losing.

First Gentleman:
The dignity of this act was worth the audience of
kings and princes; for by such was it acted.

Third Gentleman:
One of the prettiest touches of all and that which
angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not
the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's
death, with the manner how she came to't bravely
confessed and lamented by the king, how
attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one
sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'Alas,'
I would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my
heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed
colour; some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world
could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.

First Gentleman:
Are they returned to the court?

Third Gentleman:
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,
which is in the keeping of Paulina,--a piece many
years in doing and now newly performed by that rare
Italian master, Julio Romano, who, had he himself
eternity and could put breath into his work, would
beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her
ape: he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione that
they say one would speak to her and stand in hope of
answer: thither with all greediness of affection
are they gone, and there they intend to sup.

Second Gentleman:
I thought she had some great matter there in hand;
for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever
since the death of Hermione, visited that removed
house. Shall we thither and with our company piece
the rejoicing?

First Gentleman:
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:
our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.
Let's along.

AUTOLYCUS:
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me,
would preferment drop on my head. I brought the old
man and his son aboard the prince: told him I heard
them talk of a fardel and I know not what: but he
at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter,
so he then took her to be, who began to be much
sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of
weather continuing, this mystery remained
undiscovered. But 'tis all one to me; for had I
been the finder out of this secret, it would not
have relished among my other discredits.
Here come those I have done good to against my will,
and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.

Shepherd:
Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and
daughters will be all gentlemen born.

Clown:
You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me
this other day, because I was no gentleman born.
See you these clothes? say you see them not and
think me still no gentleman born: you were best say
these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the
lie, do, and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.

AUTOLYCUS:
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.

Clown:
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.

Shepherd:
And so have I, boy.

Clown:
So you have: but I was a gentleman born before my
father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and
called me brother; and then the two kings called my
father brother; and then the prince my brother and
the princess my sister called my father father; and
so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like
tears that ever we shed.

Shepherd:
We may live, son, to shed many more.

Clown:
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so
preposterous estate as we are.

AUTOLYCUS:
I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the
faults I have committed to your worship and to give
me your good report to the prince my master.

Shepherd:
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
gentlemen.

Clown:
Thou wilt amend thy life?

AUTOLYCUS:
Ay, an it like your good worship.

Clown:
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou
art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.

Shepherd:
You may say it, but not swear it.

Clown:
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and
franklins say it, I'll swear it.

Shepherd:
How if it be false, son?

Clown:
If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear
it in the behalf of his friend: and I'll swear to
the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and
that thou wilt not be drunk; but I know thou art no
tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
drunk: but I'll swear it, and I would thou wouldst
be a tall fellow of thy hands.

AUTOLYCUS:
I will prove so, sir, to my power.

Clown:
Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not
wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not
being a tall fellow, trust me not. Hark! the kings
and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the
queen's picture. Come, follow us: we'll be thy
good masters.

LEONTES:
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee!

PAULINA:
What, sovereign sir,
I did not well I meant well. All my services
You have paid home: but that you have vouchsafed,
With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of your grace, which never
My life may last to answer.

LEONTES:
O Paulina,
We honour you with trouble: but we came
To see the statue of our queen: your gallery
Have we pass'd through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my daughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother.

PAULINA:
As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
Excels whatever yet you look'd upon
Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare
To see the life as lively mock'd as ever
Still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well.
I like your silence, it the more shows off
Your wonder: but yet speak; first, you, my liege,
Comes it not something near?

LEONTES:
Her natural posture!
Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
In thy not chiding, for she was as tender
As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems.

POLIXENES:
O, not by much.

PAULINA:
So much the more our carver's excellence;
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
As she lived now.

LEONTES:
As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort, as it is
Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
Even with such life of majesty, warm life,
As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her!
I am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me
For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
There's magic in thy majesty, which has
My evils conjured to remembrance and
From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone with thee.

PERDITA:
And give me leave,
And do not say 'tis superstition, that
I kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady,
Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss.

PAULINA:
O, patience!
The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.

CAMILLO:
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
So many summers dry; scarce any joy
Did ever so long live; no sorrow
But kill'd itself much sooner.

POLIXENES:
Dear my brother,
Let him that was the cause of this have power
To take off so much grief from you as he
Will piece up in himself.

PAULINA:
Indeed, my lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor image
Would thus have wrought you,--for the stone is mine--
I'ld not have show'd it.

LEONTES:
Do not draw the curtain.

PAULINA:
No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
May think anon it moves.

LEONTES:
Let be, let be.
Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already--
What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
Did verily bear blood?

POLIXENES:
Masterly done:
The very life seems warm upon her lip.

LEONTES:
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,
As we are mock'd with art.

PAULINA:
I'll draw the curtain:
My lord's almost so far transported that
He'll think anon it lives.

LEONTES:
O sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together!
No settled senses of the world can match
The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone.

PAULINA:
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: but
I could afflict you farther.

LEONTES:
Do, Paulina;
For this affliction has a taste as sweet
As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,
There is an air comes from her: what fine chisel
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her.

PAULINA:
Good my lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?

LEONTES:
No, not these twenty years.

PERDITA:
So long could I
Stand by, a looker on.

PAULINA:
Either forbear,
Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement. If you can behold it,
I'll make the statue move indeed, descend
And take you by the hand; but then you'll think--
Which I protest against--I am assisted
By wicked powers.

LEONTES:
What you can make her do,
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy
To make her speak as move.

PAULINA:
It is required
You do awake your faith. Then all stand still;
On: those that think it is unlawful business
I am about, let them depart.

LEONTES:
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.

PAULINA:
Music, awake her; strike!
'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come,
I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away,
Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs:
Start not; her actions shall be holy as
You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her
Until you see her die again; for then
You kill her double. Nay, present your hand:
When she was young you woo'd her; now in age
Is she become the suitor?

LEONTES:
O, she's warm!
If this be magic, let it be an art
Lawful as eating.

POLIXENES:
She embraces him.

CAMILLO:
She hangs about his neck:
If she pertain to life let her speak too.

POLIXENES:
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,
Or how stolen from the dead.

PAULINA:
That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old tale: but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel
And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady;
Our Perdita is found.

HERMIONE:
You gods, look down
And from your sacred vials pour your graces
Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own.
Where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found
Thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that I,
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
Myself to see the issue.

PAULINA:
There's time enough for that;
Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
Your joys with like relation. Go together,
You precious winners all; your exultation
Partake to every one. I, an old turtle,
Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there
My mate, that's never to be found again,
Lament till I am lost.

LEONTES:
O, peace, Paulina!
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a wife: this is a match,
And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine;
But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,
As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many
A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far--
For him, I partly know his mind--to find thee
An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,
And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty
Is richly noted and here justified
By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
What! look upon my brother: both your pardons,
That e'er I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion. This is your son-in-law,
And son unto the king, who, heavens directing,
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely
Each one demand an answer to his part
Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first
We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Escalus.

ESCALUS:
My lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Of government the properties to unfold,
Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse;
Since I am put to know that your own science
Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice
My strength can give you: then no more remains,
But that to your sufficiency, as your Worth is able,
And let them work. The nature of our people,
Our city's institutions, and the terms
For common justice, you're as pregnant in
As art and practise hath enriched any
That we remember. There is our commission,
From which we would not have you warp. Call hither,
I say, bid come before us Angelo.
What figure of us think you he will bear?
For you must know, we have with special soul
Elected him our absence to supply,
Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love,
And given his deputation all the organs
Of our own power: what think you of it?

ESCALUS:
If any in Vienna be of worth
To undergo such ample grace and honour,
It is Lord Angelo.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Look where he comes.

ANGELO:
Always obedient to your grace's will,
I come to know your pleasure.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Angelo,
There is a kind of character in thy life,
That to the observer doth thy history
Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings
Are not thine own so proper as to waste
Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.
Heaven doth with us as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike
As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely touch'd
But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech
To one that can my part in him advertise;
Hold therefore, Angelo:--
In our remove be thou at full ourself;
Mortality and mercy in Vienna
Live in thy tongue and heart: old Escalus,
Though first in question, is thy secondary.
Take thy commission.

ANGELO:
Now, good my lord,
Let there be some more test made of my metal,
Before so noble and so great a figure
Be stamp'd upon it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No more evasion:
We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice
Proceeded to you; therefore take your honours.
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition
That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you,
As time and our concernings shall importune,
How it goes with us, and do look to know
What doth befall you here. So, fare you well;
To the hopeful execution do I leave you
Of your commissions.

ANGELO:
Yet give leave, my lord,
That we may bring you something on the way.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My haste may not admit it;
Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do
With any scruple; your scope is as mine own
So to enforce or qualify the laws
As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand:
I'll privily away. I love the people,
But do not like to stage me to their eyes:
Through it do well, I do not relish well
Their loud applause and Aves vehement;
Nor do I think the man of safe discretion
That does affect it. Once more, fare you well.

ANGELO:
The heavens give safety to your purposes!

ESCALUS:
Lead forth and bring you back in happiness!

DUKE:
I thank you. Fare you well.

ESCALUS:
I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave
To have free speech with you; and it concerns me
To look into the bottom of my place:
A power I have, but of what strength and nature
I am not yet instructed.

ANGELO:
'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together,
And we may soon our satisfaction have
Touching that point.

ESCALUS:
I'll wait upon your honour.

LUCIO:
If the duke with the other dukes come not to
composition with the King of Hungary, why then all
the dukes fall upon the king.

First Gentleman:
Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of
Hungary's!

Second Gentleman:
Amen.

LUCIO:
Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that
went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped
one out of the table.

Second Gentleman:
'Thou shalt not steal'?

LUCIO:
Ay, that he razed.

First Gentleman:
Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and
all the rest from their functions: they put forth
to steal. There's not a soldier of us all, that, in
the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition
well that prays for peace.

Second Gentleman:
I never heard any soldier dislike it.

LUCIO:
I believe thee; for I think thou never wast where
grace was said.

Second Gentleman:
No? a dozen times at least.

First Gentleman:
What, in metre?

LUCIO:
In any proportion or in any language.

First Gentleman:
I think, or in any religion.

LUCIO:
Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all
controversy: as, for example, thou thyself art a
wicked villain, despite of all grace.

First Gentleman:
Well, there went but a pair of shears between us.

LUCIO:
I grant; as there may between the lists and the
velvet. Thou art the list.

First Gentleman:
And thou the velvet: thou art good velvet; thou'rt
a three-piled piece, I warrant thee: I had as lief
be a list of an English kersey as be piled, as thou
art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak
feelingly now?

LUCIO:
I think thou dost; and, indeed, with most painful
feeling of thy speech: I will, out of thine own
confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst I
live, forget to drink after thee.

First Gentleman:
I think I have done myself wrong, have I not?

Second Gentleman:
Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.

LUCIO:
Behold, behold. where Madam Mitigation comes! I
have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to--

Second Gentleman:
To what, I pray?

LUCIO:
Judge.

Second Gentleman:
To three thousand dolours a year.

First Gentleman:
Ay, and more.

LUCIO:
A French crown more.

First Gentleman:
Thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou
art full of error; I am sound.

LUCIO:
Nay, not as one would say, healthy; but so sound as
things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow;
impiety has made a feast of thee.

First Gentleman:
How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Well, well; there's one yonder arrested and carried
to prison was worth five thousand of you all.

Second Gentleman:
Who's that, I pray thee?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.

First Gentleman:
Claudio to prison? 'tis not so.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Nay, but I know 'tis so: I saw him arrested, saw
him carried away; and, which is more, within these
three days his head to be chopped off.

LUCIO:
But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so.
Art thou sure of this?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam
Julietta with child.

LUCIO:
Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two
hours since, and he was ever precise in
promise-keeping.

Second Gentleman:
Besides, you know, it draws something near to the
speech we had to such a purpose.

First Gentleman:
But, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.

LUCIO:
Away! let's go learn the truth of it.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what
with the gallows and what with poverty, I am
custom-shrunk.
How now! what's the news with you?

POMPEY:
Yonder man is carried to prison.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Well; what has he done?

POMPEY:
A woman.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
But what's his offence?

POMPEY:
Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What, is there a maid with child by him?

POMPEY:
No, but there's a woman with maid by him. You have
not heard of the proclamation, have you?

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What proclamation, man?

POMPEY:
All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
And what shall become of those in the city?

POMPEY:
They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too,
but that a wise burgher put in for them.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be
pulled down?

POMPEY:
To the ground, mistress.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth!
What shall become of me?

POMPEY:
Come; fear you not: good counsellors lack no
clients: though you change your place, you need not
change your trade; I'll be your tapster still.
Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that
have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
will be considered.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
What's to do here, Thomas tapster? let's withdraw.

POMPEY:
Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to
prison; and there's Madam Juliet.

CLAUDIO:
Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

Provost:
I do it not in evil disposition,
But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

CLAUDIO:
Thus can the demigod Authority
Make us pay down for our offence by weight
The words of heaven; on whom it will, it will;
On whom it will not, so; yet still 'tis just.

LUCIO:
Why, how now, Claudio! whence comes this restraint?

CLAUDIO:
From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty:
As surfeit is the father of much fast,
So every scope by the immoderate use
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue,
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,
A thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.

LUCIO:
If could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would
send for certain of my creditors: and yet, to say
the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom
as the morality of imprisonment. What's thy
offence, Claudio?

CLAUDIO:
What but to speak of would offend again.

LUCIO:
What, is't murder?

CLAUDIO:
No.

LUCIO:
Lechery?

CLAUDIO:
Call it so.

Provost:
Away, sir! you must go.

CLAUDIO:
One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you.

LUCIO:
A hundred, if they'll do you any good.
Is lechery so look'd after?

CLAUDIO:
Thus stands it with me: upon a true contract
I got possession of Julietta's bed:
You know the lady; she is fast my wife,
Save that we do the denunciation lack
Of outward order: this we came not to,
Only for propagation of a dower
Remaining in the coffer of her friends,
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love
Till time had made them for us. But it chances
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment
With character too gross is writ on Juliet.

LUCIO:
With child, perhaps?

CLAUDIO:
Unhappily, even so.
And the new deputy now for the duke--
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness,
Or whether that the body public be
A horse whereon the governor doth ride,
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur;
Whether the tyranny be in his place,
Or in his emmence that fills it up,
I stagger in:--but this new governor
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties
Which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round
And none of them been worn; and, for a name,
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act
Freshly on me: 'tis surely for a name.

LUCIO:
I warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on
thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love,
may sigh it off. Send after the duke and appeal to
him.

CLAUDIO:
I have done so, but he's not to be found.
I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service:
This day my sister should the cloister enter
And there receive her approbation:
Acquaint her with the danger of my state:
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends
To the strict deputy; bid herself assay him:
I have great hope in that; for in her youth
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art
When she will play with reason and discourse,
And well she can persuade.

LUCIO:
I pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the
like, which else would stand under grievous
imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I
would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a
game of tick-tack. I'll to her.

CLAUDIO:
I thank you, good friend Lucio.

LUCIO:
Within two hours.

CLAUDIO:
Come, officer, away!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No, holy father; throw away that thought;
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee
To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends
Of burning youth.

FRIAR THOMAS:
May your grace speak of it?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My holy sir, none better knows than you
How I have ever loved the life removed
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies
Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps.
I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo,
A man of stricture and firm abstinence,
My absolute power and place here in Vienna,
And he supposes me travell'd to Poland;
For so I have strew'd it in the common ear,
And so it is received. Now, pious sir,
You will demand of me why I do this?

FRIAR THOMAS:
Gladly, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
We have strict statutes and most biting laws.
The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds,
Which for this nineteen years we have let slip;
Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave,
That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers,
Having bound up the threatening twigs of birch,
Only to stick it in their children's sight
For terror, not to use, in time the rod
Becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees,
Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead;
And liberty plucks justice by the nose;
The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart
Goes all decorum.

FRIAR THOMAS:
It rested in your grace
To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased:
And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd
Than in Lord Angelo.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I do fear, too dreadful:
Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope,
'Twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them
For what I bid them do: for we bid this be done,
When evil deeds have their permissive pass
And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my father,
I have on Angelo imposed the office;
Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home,
And yet my nature never in the fight
To do in slander. And to behold his sway,
I will, as 'twere a brother of your order,
Visit both prince and people: therefore, I prithee,
Supply me with the habit and instruct me
How I may formally in person bear me
Like a true friar. More reasons for this action
At our more leisure shall I render you;
Only, this one: Lord Angelo is precise;
Stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses
That his blood flows, or that his appetite
Is more to bread than stone: hence shall we see,
If power change purpose, what our seemers be.

ISABELLA:
And have you nuns no farther privileges?

FRANCISCA:
Are not these large enough?

ISABELLA:
Yes, truly; I speak not as desiring more;
But rather wishing a more strict restraint
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Who's that which calls?

FRANCISCA:
It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella,
Turn you the key, and know his business of him;
You may, I may not; you are yet unsworn.
When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men
But in the presence of the prioress:
Then, if you speak, you must not show your face,
Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
He calls again; I pray you, answer him.

ISABELLA:
Peace and prosperity! Who is't that calls

LUCIO:
Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses
Proclaim you are no less! Can you so stead me
As bring me to the sight of Isabella,
A novice of this place and the fair sister
To her unhappy brother Claudio?

ISABELLA:
Why 'her unhappy brother'? let me ask,
The rather for I now must make you know
I am that Isabella and his sister.

LUCIO:
Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you:
Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.

ISABELLA:
Woe me! for what?

LUCIO:
For that which, if myself might be his judge,
He should receive his punishment in thanks:
He hath got his friend with child.

ISABELLA:
Sir, make me not your story.

LUCIO:
It is true.
I would not--though 'tis my familiar sin
With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest,
Tongue far from heart--play with all virgins so:
I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted.
By your renouncement an immortal spirit,
And to be talk'd with in sincerity,
As with a saint.

ISABELLA:
You do blaspheme the good in mocking me.

LUCIO:
Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus:
Your brother and his lover have embraced:
As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings
To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.

ISABELLA:
Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet?

LUCIO:
Is she your cousin?

ISABELLA:
Adoptedly; as school-maids change their names
By vain though apt affection.

LUCIO:
She it is.

ISABELLA:
O, let him marry her.

LUCIO:
This is the point.
The duke is very strangely gone from hence;
Bore many gentlemen, myself being one,
In hand and hope of action: but we do learn
By those that know the very nerves of state,
His givings-out were of an infinite distance
From his true-meant design. Upon his place,
And with full line of his authority,
Governs Lord Angelo; a man whose blood
Is very snow-broth; one who never feels
The wanton stings and motions of the sense,
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge
With profits of the mind, study and fast.
He--to give fear to use and liberty,
Which have for long run by the hideous law,
As mice by lions--hath pick'd out an act,
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life
Falls into forfeit: he arrests him on it;
And follows close the rigour of the statute,
To make him an example. All hope is gone,
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer
To soften Angelo: and that's my pith of business
'Twixt you and your poor brother.

ISABELLA:
Doth he so seek his life?

LUCIO:
Has censured him
Already; and, as I hear, the provost hath
A warrant for his execution.

ISABELLA:
Alas! what poor ability's in me
To do him good?

LUCIO:
Assay the power you have.

ISABELLA:
My power? Alas, I doubt--

LUCIO:
Our doubts are traitors
And make us lose the good we oft might win
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo,
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue,
Men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel,
All their petitions are as freely theirs
As they themselves would owe them.

ISABELLA:
I'll see what I can do.

LUCIO:
But speedily.

ISABELLA:
I will about it straight;
No longer staying but to give the mother
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you:
Commend me to my brother: soon at night
I'll send him certain word of my success.

LUCIO:
I take my leave of you.

ISABELLA:
Good sir, adieu.

ANGELO:
We must not make a scarecrow of the law,
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey,
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it
Their perch and not their terror.

ESCALUS:
Ay, but yet
Let us be keen, and rather cut a little,
Than fall, and bruise to death. Alas, this gentleman
Whom I would save, had a most noble father!
Let but your honour know,
Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue,
That, in the working of your own affections,
Had time cohered with place or place with wishing,
Or that the resolute acting of your blood
Could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose,
Whether you had not sometime in your life
Err'd in this point which now you censure him,
And pull'd the law upon you.

ANGELO:
'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus,
Another thing to fall. I not deny,
The jury, passing on the prisoner's life,
May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two
Guiltier than him they try. What's open made to justice,
That justice seizes: what know the laws
That thieves do pass on thieves? 'Tis very pregnant,
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take't
Because we see it; but what we do not see
We tread upon, and never think of it.
You may not so extenuate his offence
For I have had such faults; but rather tell me,
When I, that censure him, do so offend,
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death,
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die.

ESCALUS:
Be it as your wisdom will.

ANGELO:
Where is the provost?

Provost:
Here, if it like your honour.

ANGELO:
See that Claudio
Be executed by nine to-morrow morning:
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared;
For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.

ESCALUS:

ELBOW:
Come, bring them away: if these be good people in
a commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in
common houses, I know no law: bring them away.

ANGELO:
How now, sir! What's your name? and what's the matter?

ELBOW:
If it Please your honour, I am the poor duke's
constable, and my name is Elbow: I do lean upon
justice, sir, and do bring in here before your good
honour two notorious benefactors.

ANGELO:
Benefactors? Well; what benefactors are they? are
they not malefactors?

ELBOW:
If it? please your honour, I know not well what they
are: but precise villains they are, that I am sure
of; and void of all profanation in the world that
good Christians ought to have.

ESCALUS:
This comes off well; here's a wise officer.

ANGELO:
Go to: what quality are they of? Elbow is your
name? why dost thou not speak, Elbow?

POMPEY:
He cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.

ANGELO:
What are you, sir?

ELBOW:
He, sir! a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that
serves a bad woman; whose house, sir, was, as they
say, plucked down in the suburbs; and now she
professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a very ill house too.

ESCALUS:
How know you that?

ELBOW:
My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and your honour,--

ESCALUS:
How? thy wife?

ELBOW:
Ay, sir; whom, I thank heaven, is an honest woman,--

ESCALUS:
Dost thou detest her therefore?

ELBOW:
I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as
she, that this house, if it be not a bawd's house,
it is pity of her life, for it is a naughty house.

ESCALUS:
How dost thou know that, constable?

ELBOW:
Marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman
cardinally given, might have been accused in
fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.

ESCALUS:
By the woman's means?

ELBOW:
Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means: but as she
spit in his face, so she defied him.

POMPEY:
Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.

ELBOW:
Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable
man; prove it.

ESCALUS:
Do you hear how he misplaces?

POMPEY:
Sir, she came in great with child; and longing,
saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes;
sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very
distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit-dish, a
dish of some three-pence; your honours have seen
such dishes; they are not China dishes, but very
good dishes,--

ESCALUS:
Go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir.

POMPEY:
No, indeed, sir, not of a pin; you are therein in
the right: but to the point. As I say, this
Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and
being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for
prunes; and having but two in the dish, as I said,
Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten the
rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them very
honestly; for, as you know, Master Froth, I could
not give you three-pence again.

FROTH:
No, indeed.

POMPEY:
Very well: you being then, if you be remembered,
cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,--

FROTH:
Ay, so I did indeed.

POMPEY:
Why, very well; I telling you then, if you be
remembered, that such a one and such a one were past
cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very
good diet, as I told you,--

FROTH:
All this is true.

POMPEY:
Why, very well, then,--

ESCALUS:
Come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. What
was done to Elbow's wife, that he hath cause to
complain of? Come me to what was done to her.

POMPEY:
Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.

ESCALUS:
No, sir, nor I mean it not.

POMPEY:
Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's
leave. And, I beseech you, look into Master Froth
here, sir; a man of four-score pound a year; whose
father died at Hallowmas: was't not at Hallowmas,
Master Froth?

FROTH:
All-hallond eve.

POMPEY:
Why, very well; I hope here be truths. He, sir,
sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in
the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight
to sit, have you not?

FROTH:
I have so; because it is an open room and good for winter.

POMPEY:
Why, very well, then; I hope here be truths.

ANGELO:
This will last out a night in Russia,
When nights are longest there: I'll take my leave.
And leave you to the hearing of the cause;
Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.

ESCALUS:
I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship.
Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow's wife, once more?

POMPEY:
Once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.

ELBOW:
I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.

POMPEY:
I beseech your honour, ask me.

ESCALUS:
Well, sir; what did this gentleman to her?

POMPEY:
I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face.
Good Master Froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a
good purpose. Doth your honour mark his face?

ESCALUS:
Ay, sir, very well.

POMPEY:
Nay; I beseech you, mark it well.

ESCALUS:
Well, I do so.

POMPEY:
Doth your honour see any harm in his face?

ESCALUS:
Why, no.

POMPEY:
I'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst
thing about him. Good, then; if his face be the
worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the
constable's wife any harm? I would know that of
your honour.

ESCALUS:
He's in the right. Constable, what say you to it?

ELBOW:
First, an it like you, the house is a respected
house; next, this is a respected fellow; and his
mistress is a respected woman.

POMPEY:
By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected
person than any of us all.

ELBOW:
Varlet, thou liest; thou liest, wicked varlet! the
time has yet to come that she was ever respected
with man, woman, or child.

POMPEY:
Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.

ESCALUS:
Which is the wiser here? Justice or Iniquity? Is
this true?

ELBOW:
O thou caitiff! O thou varlet! O thou wicked
Hannibal! I respected with her before I was married
to her! If ever I was respected with her, or she
with me, let not your worship think me the poor
duke's officer. Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or
I'll have mine action of battery on thee.

ESCALUS:
If he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your
action of slander too.

ELBOW:
Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What is't
your worship's pleasure I shall do with this wicked caitiff?

ESCALUS:
Truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him
that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him
continue in his courses till thou knowest what they
are.

ELBOW:
Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, thou
wicked varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art
to continue now, thou varlet; thou art to continue.

ESCALUS:
Where were you born, friend?

FROTH:
Here in Vienna, sir.

ESCALUS:
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?

FROTH:
Yes, an't please you, sir.

ESCALUS:
So. What trade are you of, sir?

POMPHEY:
Tapster; a poor widow's tapster.

ESCALUS:
Your mistress' name?

POMPHEY:
Mistress Overdone.

ESCALUS:
Hath she had any more than one husband?

POMPEY:
Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.

ESCALUS:
Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master
Froth, I would not have you acquainted with
tapsters: they will draw you, Master Froth, and you
will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no
more of you.

FROTH:
I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never
come into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawn
in.

ESCALUS:
Well, no more of it, Master Froth: farewell.
Come you hither to me, Master tapster. What's your
name, Master tapster?

POMPEY:
Pompey.

ESCALUS:
What else?

POMPEY:
Bum, sir.

ESCALUS:
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you;
so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the
Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey,
howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you
not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.

POMPEY:
Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.

ESCALUS:
How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? What
do you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade?

POMPEY:
If the law would allow it, sir.

ESCALUS:
But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall
not be allowed in Vienna.

POMPEY:
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the
youth of the city?

ESCALUS:
No, Pompey.

POMPEY:
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then.
If your worship will take order for the drabs and
the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.

ESCALUS:
There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you:
it is but heading and hanging.

POMPEY:
If you head and hang all that offend that way but
for ten year together, you'll be glad to give out a
commission for more heads: if this law hold in
Vienna ten year, I'll rent the fairest house in it
after three-pence a bay: if you live to see this
come to pass, say Pompey told you so.

ESCALUS:
Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your
prophecy, hark you: I advise you, let me not find
you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever;
no, not for dwelling where you do: if I do, Pompey,
I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall
have you whipt: so, for this time, Pompey, fare you well.

POMPEY:
I thank your worship for your good counsel:
but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall
better determine.
Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade:
The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.

ESCALUS:
Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master
constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?

ELBOW:
Seven year and a half, sir.

ESCALUS:
I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had
continued in it some time. You say, seven years together?

ELBOW:
And a half, sir.

ESCALUS:
Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you
wrong to put you so oft upon 't: are there not men
in your ward sufficient to serve it?

ELBOW:
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they
are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I
do it for some piece of money, and go through with
all.

ESCALUS:
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the most sufficient of your parish.

ELBOW:
To your worship's house, sir?

ESCALUS:
To my house. Fare you well.
What's o'clock, think you?

Justice:
Eleven, sir.

ESCALUS:
I pray you home to dinner with me.

Justice:
I humbly thank you.

ESCALUS:
It grieves me for the death of Claudio;
But there's no remedy.

Justice:
Lord Angelo is severe.

ESCALUS:
It is but needful:
Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe:
But yet,--poor Claudio! There is no remedy.
Come, sir.

Servant:
He's hearing of a cause; he will come straight
I'll tell him of you.

Provost:
Pray you, do.
I'll know
His pleasure; may be he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream!
All sects, all ages smack of this vice; and he
To die for't!

ANGELO:
Now, what's the matter. Provost?

Provost:
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?

ANGELO:
Did not I tell thee yea? hadst thou not order?
Why dost thou ask again?

Provost:
Lest I might be too rash:
Under your good correction, I have seen,
When, after execution, judgment hath
Repented o'er his doom.

ANGELO:
Go to; let that be mine:
Do you your office, or give up your place,
And you shall well be spared.

Provost:
I crave your honour's pardon.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
She's very near her hour.

ANGELO:
Dispose of her
To some more fitter place, and that with speed.

Servant:
Here is the sister of the man condemn'd
Desires access to you.

ANGELO:
Hath he a sister?

Provost:
Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already.

ANGELO:
Well, let her be admitted.
See you the fornicatress be removed:
Let have needful, but not lavish, means;
There shall be order for't.

Provost:
God save your honour!

ANGELO:
Stay a little while.
You're welcome: what's your will?

ISABELLA:
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
Please but your honour hear me.

ANGELO:
Well; what's your suit?

ISABELLA:
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war 'twixt will and will not.

ANGELO:
Well; the matter?

ISABELLA:
I have a brother is condemn'd to die:
I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
And not my brother.

Provost:

ANGELO:
Condemn the fault and not the actor of it?
Why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done:
Mine were the very cipher of a function,
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the actor.

ISABELLA:
O just but severe law!
I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Must he needs die?

ANGELO:
Maiden, no remedy.

ISABELLA:
Yes; I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

ANGELO:
I will not do't.

ISABELLA:
But can you, if you would?

ANGELO:
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.

ISABELLA:
But might you do't, and do the world no wrong,
If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse
As mine is to him?

ANGELO:
He's sentenced; 'tis too late.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Too late? why, no; I, that do speak a word.
May call it back again. Well, believe this,
No ceremony that to great ones 'longs,
Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does.
If he had been as you and you as he,
You would have slipt like him; but he, like you,
Would not have been so stern.

ANGELO:
Pray you, be gone.

ISABELLA:
I would to heaven I had your potency,
And you were Isabel! should it then be thus?
No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge,
And what a prisoner.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words.

ISABELLA:
Alas, alas!
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be,
If He, which is the top of judgment, should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that;
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like man new made.

ANGELO:
Be you content, fair maid;
It is the law, not I condemn your brother:
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.

ISABELLA:
To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him!
He's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you;
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
There's many have committed it.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept:
Those many had not dared to do that evil,
If the first that did the edict infringe
Had answer'd for his deed: now 'tis awake
Takes note of what is done; and, like a prophet,
Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils,
Either new, or by remissness new-conceived,
And so in progress to be hatch'd and born,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But, ere they live, to end.

ISABELLA:
Yet show some pity.

ANGELO:
I show it most of all when I show justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall;
And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.

ISABELLA:
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he, that suffer's. O, it is excellent
To have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Could great men thunder
As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet,
For every pelting, petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder;
Nothing but thunder! Merciful Heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
Than the soft myrtle: but man, proud man,
Drest in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he's most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As make the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.

LUCIO:

Provost:

ISABELLA:
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself:
Great men may jest with saints; 'tis wit in them,
But in the less foul profanation.

LUCIO:
Thou'rt i' the right, girl; more o, that.

ISABELLA:
That in the captain's but a choleric word,
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

LUCIO:

ANGELO:
Why do you put these sayings upon me?

ISABELLA:
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself,
That skins the vice o' the top. Go to your bosom;
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
That's like my brother's fault: if it confess
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brother's life.

ANGELO:

ISABELLA:
Gentle my lord, turn back.

ANGELO:
I will bethink me: come again tomorrow.

ISABELLA:
Hark how I'll bribe you: good my lord, turn back.

ANGELO:
How! bribe me?

ISABELLA:
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor
As fancy values them; but with true prayers
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.

ANGELO:
Well; come to me to-morrow.

LUCIO:

ISABELLA:
Heaven keep your honour safe!

ANGELO:

ISABELLA:
At what hour to-morrow
Shall I attend your lordship?

ANGELO:
At any time 'fore noon.

ISABELLA:
'Save your honour!

ANGELO:
From thee, even from thy virtue!
What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or mine?
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
Ha!
Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense
Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live!
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again,
And feast upon her eyes? What is't I dream on?
O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet,
With all her double vigour, art and nature,
Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Even till now,
When men were fond, I smiled and wonder'd how.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hail to you, provost! so I think you are.

Provost:
I am the provost. What's your will, good friar?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bound by my charity and my blest order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.

Provost:
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
Look, here comes one: a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blister'd her report: she is with child;
And he that got it, sentenced; a young man
More fit to do another such offence
Than die for this.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
When must he die?

Provost:
As I do think, to-morrow.
I have provided for you: stay awhile,
And you shall be conducted.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?

JULIET:
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Or hollowly put on.

JULIET:
I'll gladly learn.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Love you the man that wrong'd you?

JULIET:
Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
So then it seems your most offenceful act
Was mutually committed?

JULIET:
Mutually.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.

JULIET:
I do confess it, and repent it, father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent,
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always towards ourselves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear,--

JULIET:
I do repent me, as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There rest.
Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you, Benedicite!

JULIET:
Must die to-morrow! O injurious love,
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!

Provost:
'Tis pity of him.

ANGELO:
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words;
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel: Heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name;
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied
Is like a good thing, being often read,
Grown fear'd and tedious; yea, my gravity,
Wherein--let no man hear me--I take pride,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume,
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood:
Let's write good angel on the devil's horn:
'Tis not the devil's crest.
How now! who's there?

Servant:
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.

ANGELO:
Teach her the way.
O heavens!
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself,
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive: and even so
The general, subject to a well-wish'd king,
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offence.
How now, fair maid?

ISABELLA:
I am come to know your pleasure.

ANGELO:
That you might know it, would much better please me
Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live.

ISABELLA:
Even so. Heaven keep your honour!

ANGELO:
Yet may he live awhile; and, it may be,
As long as you or I yet he must die.

ISABELLA:
Under your sentence?

ANGELO:
Yea.

ISABELLA:
When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.

ANGELO:
Ha! fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image
In stamps that are forbid: 'tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
To make a false one.

ISABELLA:
'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.

ANGELO:
Say you so? then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath stain'd?

ISABELLA:
Sir, believe this,
I had rather give my body than my soul.

ANGELO:
I talk not of your soul: our compell'd sins
Stand more for number than for accompt.

ISABELLA:
How say you?

ANGELO:
Nay, I'll not warrant that; for I can speak
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
I, now the voice of the recorded law,
Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life:
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brother's life?

ISABELLA:
Please you to do't,
I'll take it as a peril to my soul,
It is no sin at all, but charity.

ANGELO:
Pleased you to do't at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.

ISABELLA:
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit,
If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.

ANGELO:
Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,
Or seem so craftily; and that's not good.

ISABELLA:
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.

ANGELO:
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me;
To be received plain, I'll speak more gross:
Your brother is to die.

ISABELLA:
So.

ANGELO:
And his offence is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.

ISABELLA:
True.

ANGELO:
Admit no other way to save his life,--
As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But in the loss of question,--that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person,
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-building law; and that there were
No earthly mean to save him, but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer;
What would you do?

ISABELLA:
As much for my poor brother as myself:
That is, were I under the terms of death,
The impression of keen whips I'ld wear as rubies,
And strip myself to death, as to a bed
That longing have been sick for, ere I'ld yield
My body up to shame.

ANGELO:
Then must your brother die.

ISABELLA:
And 'twere the cheaper way:
Better it were a brother died at once,
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Should die for ever.

ANGELO:
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
That you have slander'd so?

ISABELLA:
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon
Are of two houses: lawful mercy
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

ANGELO:
You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant;
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment than a vice.

ISABELLA:
O, pardon me, my lord; it oft falls out,
To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
For his advantage that I dearly love.

ANGELO:
We are all frail.

ISABELLA:
Else let my brother die,
If not a feodary, but only he
Owe and succeed thy weakness.

ANGELO:
Nay, women are frail too.

ISABELLA:
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves;
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.

ANGELO:
I think it well:
And from this testimony of your own sex,--
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames,--let me be bold;
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is, a woman; if you be more, you're none;
If you be one, as you are well express'd
By all external warrants, show it now,
By putting on the destined livery.

ISABELLA:
I have no tongue but one: gentle my lord,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.

ANGELO:
Plainly conceive, I love you.

ISABELLA:
My brother did love Juliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for it.

ANGELO:
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.

ISABELLA:
I know your virtue hath a licence in't,
Which seems a little fouler than it is,
To pluck on others.

ANGELO:
Believe me, on mine honour,
My words express my purpose.

ISABELLA:
Ha! little honour to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look for't:
Sign me a present pardon for my brother,
Or with an outstretch'd throat I'll tell the world aloud
What man thou art.

ANGELO:
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i' the state,
Will so your accusation overweigh,
That you shall stifle in your own report
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein:
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes,
That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will;
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To lingering sufferance. Answer me to-morrow,
Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
I'll prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.

ISABELLA:
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue,
Either of condemnation or approof;
Bidding the law make court'sy to their will:
Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite,
To follow as it draws! I'll to my brother:
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour.
That, had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up,
Before his sister should her body stoop
To such abhorr'd pollution.
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
More than our brother is our chastity.
I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request,
And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?

CLAUDIO:
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope:
I've hope to live, and am prepared to die.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Be absolute for death; either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences,
That dost this habitation, where thou keep'st,
Hourly afflict: merely, thou art death's fool;
For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun
And yet runn'st toward him still. Thou art not noble;
For all the accommodations that thou bear'st
Are nursed by baseness. Thou'rt by no means valiant;
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provokest; yet grossly fear'st
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
For thou exist'st on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get,
And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain;
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
After the moon. If thou art rich, thou'rt poor;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep,
Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
To make thy riches pleasant. What's yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid moe thousand deaths: yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.

CLAUDIO:
I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.

ISABELLA:

Provost:
Who's there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Dear sir, ere long I'll visit you again.

CLAUDIO:
Most holy sir, I thank you.

ISABELLA:
My business is a word or two with Claudio.

Provost:
And very welcome. Look, signior, here's your sister.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Provost, a word with you.

Provost:
As many as you please.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.

CLAUDIO:
Now, sister, what's the comfort?

ISABELLA:
Why,
As all comforts are; most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger:
Therefore your best appointment make with speed;
To-morrow you set on.

CLAUDIO:
Is there no remedy?

ISABELLA:
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain.

CLAUDIO:
But is there any?

ISABELLA:
Yes, brother, you may live:
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If you'll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.

CLAUDIO:
Perpetual durance?

ISABELLA:
Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
Though all the world's vastidity you had,
To a determined scope.

CLAUDIO:
But in what nature?

ISABELLA:
In such a one as, you consenting to't,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.

CLAUDIO:
Let me know the point.

ISABELLA:
O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honour. Darest thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle, that we tread upon,
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
As when a giant dies.

CLAUDIO:
Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
And hug it in mine arms.

ISABELLA:
There spake my brother; there my father's grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i' the head and follies doth emmew
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond as deep as hell.

CLAUDIO:
The prenzie Angelo!

ISABELLA:
O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell,
The damned'st body to invest and cover
In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio?
If I would yield him my virginity,
Thou mightst be freed.

CLAUDIO:
O heavens! it cannot be.

ISABELLA:
Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence,
So to offend him still. This night's the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest to-morrow.

CLAUDIO:
Thou shalt not do't.

ISABELLA:
O, were it but my life,
I'ld throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin.

CLAUDIO:
Thanks, dear Isabel.

ISABELLA:
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.

CLAUDIO:
Yes. Has he affections in him,
That thus can make him bite the law by the nose,
When he would force it? Sure, it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.

ISABELLA:
Which is the least?

CLAUDIO:
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!

ISABELLA:
What says my brother?

CLAUDIO:
Death is a fearful thing.

ISABELLA:
And shamed life a hateful.

CLAUDIO:
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
To be imprison'd in the viewless winds,
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling: 'tis too horrible!
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
To what we fear of death.

ISABELLA:
Alas, alas!

CLAUDIO:
Sweet sister, let me live:
What sin you do to save a brother's life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
That it becomes a virtue.

ISABELLA:
O you beast!
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Is't not a kind of incest, to take life
From thine own sister's shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair!
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Ne'er issued from his blood. Take my defiance!
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed:
I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.

CLAUDIO:
Nay, hear me, Isabel.

ISABELLA:
O, fie, fie, fie!
Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd:
'Tis best thou diest quickly.

CLAUDIO:
O hear me, Isabella!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

ISABELLA:
What is your will?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and
by have some speech with you: the satisfaction I
would require is likewise your own benefit.

ISABELLA:
I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be
stolen out of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you
and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to
corrupt her; only he hath made an essay of her
virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition
of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her,
hath made him that gracious denial which he is most
glad to receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I
know this to be true; therefore prepare yourself to
death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes
that are fallible: tomorrow you must die; go to
your knees and make ready.

CLAUDIO:
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love
with life that I will sue to be rid of it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hold you there: farewell.
Provost, a word with you!

Provost:
What's your will, father

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me
awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my
habit no loss shall touch her by my company.

Provost:
In good time.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good:
the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty
brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of
your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever
fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and, but
that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should
wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this
substitute, and to save your brother?

ISABELLA:
I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my
brother die by the law than my son should be
unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good duke
deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can
speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or
discover his government.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That shall not be much amiss: Yet, as the matter
now stands, he will avoid your accusation; he made
trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my
advisings: to the love I have in doing good a
remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe
that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged
lady a merited benefit; redeem your brother from
the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious
person; and much please the absent duke, if
peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of
this business.

ISABELLA:
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do
anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have
you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of
Frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?

ISABELLA:
I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
She should this Angelo have married; was affianced
to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between
which time of the contract and limit of the
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea,
having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the
poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and
renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most
kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of
her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her
combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.

ISABELLA:
Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them
with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole,
pretending in her discoveries of dishonour: in few,
bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet
wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears,
is washed with them, but relents not.

ISABELLA:
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid
from the world! What corruption in this life, that
it will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the
cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps
you from dishonour in doing it.

ISABELLA:
Show me how, good father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance
of her first affection: his unjust unkindness, that
in all reason should have quenched her love, hath,
like an impediment in the current, made it more
violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his
requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with
his demands to the point; only refer yourself to
this advantage, first, that your stay with him may
not be long; that the time may have all shadow and
silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
This being granted in course,--and now follows
all,--we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up
your appointment, go in your place; if the encounter
acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to
her recompense: and here, by this, is your brother
saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana
advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid
will I frame and make fit for his attempt. If you
think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness
of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.
What think you of it?

ISABELLA:
The image of it gives me content already; and I
trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily
to Angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his
bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will
presently to Saint Luke's: there, at the moated
grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that
it may be quickly.

ISABELLA:
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.

ELBOW:
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we
shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O heavens! what stuff is here

POMPEY:
'Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by
order of law a furred gown to keep him warm; and
furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that
craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.

ELBOW:
Come your way, sir. 'Bless you, good father friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And you, good brother father. What offence hath
this man made you, sir?

ELBOW:
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we
take him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found
upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have
sent to the deputy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd!
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such a filthy vice: say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

POMPEY:
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet,
sir, I would prove--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer:
Correction and instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.

ELBOW:
He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if
he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were
as good go a mile on his errand.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
From our faults, as faults from seeming, free!

ELBOW:
His neck will come to your waist,--a cord, sir.

POMPEY:
I spy comfort; I cry bail. Here's a gentleman and a
friend of mine.

LUCIO:
How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of
Caesar? art thou led in triumph? What, is there
none of Pygmalion's images, newly made woman, to be
had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and
extracting it clutch'd? What reply, ha? What
sayest thou to this tune, matter and method? Is't
not drowned i' the last rain, ha? What sayest
thou, Trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is
the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
trick of it?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Still thus, and thus; still worse!

LUCIO:
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she
still, ha?

POMPEY:
Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she
is herself in the tub.

LUCIO:
Why, 'tis good; it is the right of it; it must be
so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd:
an unshunned consequence; it must be so. Art going
to prison, Pompey?

POMPEY:
Yes, faith, sir.

LUCIO:
Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell: go, say I
sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey? or how?

ELBOW:
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.

LUCIO:
Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the
due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right: bawd is he
doubtless, and of antiquity too; bawd-born.
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison,
Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
will keep the house.

POMPEY:
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.

LUCIO:
No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear.
I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If
you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the
more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. 'Bless you, friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And you.

LUCIO:
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?

ELBOW:
Come your ways, sir; come.

POMPEY:
You will not bail me, then, sir?

LUCIO:
Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar?
what news?

ELBOW:
Come your ways, sir; come.

LUCIO:
Go to kennel, Pompey; go.
What news, friar, of the duke?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know none. Can you tell me of any?

LUCIO:
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other
some, he is in Rome: but where is he, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.

LUCIO:
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from
the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born
to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence; he
puts transgression to 't.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He does well in 't.

LUCIO:
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in
him: something too crabbed that way, friar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

LUCIO:
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred;
it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp
it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put
down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and
woman after this downright way of creation: is it
true, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
How should he be made, then?

LUCIO:
Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he
was begot between two stock-fishes. But it is
certain that when he makes water his urine is
congealed ice; that I know to be true: and he is a
motion generative; that's infallible.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.

LUCIO:
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the
rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a
man! Would the duke that is absent have done this?
Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a
hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing
a thousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he
knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I never heard the absent duke much detected for
women; he was not inclined that way.

LUCIO:
O, sir, you are deceived.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis not possible.

LUCIO:
Who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and
his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish: the
duke had crotchets in him. He would be drunk too;
that let me inform you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You do him wrong, surely.

LUCIO:
Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was the
duke: and I believe I know the cause of his
withdrawing.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What, I prithee, might be the cause?

LUCIO:
No, pardon; 'tis a secret must be locked within the
teeth and the lips: but this I can let you
understand, the greater file of the subject held the
duke to be wise.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Wise! why, no question but he was.

LUCIO:
A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking:
the very stream of his life and the business he hath
helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better
proclamation. Let him be but testimonied in his own
bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the
envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier.
Therefore you speak unskilfully: or if your
knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.

LUCIO:
Sir, I know him, and I love him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with
dearer love.

LUCIO:
Come, sir, I know what I know.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I can hardly believe that, since you know not what
you speak. But, if ever the duke return, as our
prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your
answer before him. If it be honest you have spoke,
you have courage to maintain it: I am bound to call
upon you; and, I pray you, your name?

LUCIO:
Sir, my name is Lucio; well known to the duke.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to
report you.

LUCIO:
I fear you not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, you hope the duke will return no more; or you
imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But indeed I
can do you little harm; you'll forswear this again.

LUCIO:
I'll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me,
friar. But no more of this. Canst thou tell if
Claudio die to-morrow or no?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Why should he die, sir?

LUCIO:
Why? For filling a bottle with a tundish. I would
the duke we talk of were returned again: the
ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with
continency; sparrows must not build in his
house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The duke
yet would have dark deeds darkly answered; he would
never bring them to light: would he were returned!
Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing.
Farewell, good friar: I prithee, pray for me. The
duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on
Fridays. He's not past it yet, and I say to thee,
he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown
bread and garlic: say that I said so. Farewell.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No might nor greatness in mortality
Can censure 'scape; back-wounding calumny
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
But who comes here?

ESCALUS:
Go; away with her to prison!

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
Good my lord, be good to me; your honour is accounted
a merciful man; good my lord.

ESCALUS:
Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in
the same kind! This would make mercy swear and play
the tyrant.

Provost:
A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please
your honour.

MISTRESS OVERDONE:
My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.
Mistress Kate Keepdown was with child by him in the
duke's time; he promised her marriage: his child
is a year and a quarter old, come Philip and Jacob:
I have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me!

ESCALUS:
That fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him be
called before us. Away with her to prison! Go to;
no more words.
Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered;
Claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished
with divines, and have all charitable preparation.
if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be
so with him.

Provost:
So please you, this friar hath been with him, and
advised him for the entertainment of death.

ESCALUS:
Good even, good father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Bliss and goodness on you!

ESCALUS:
Of whence are you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not of this country, though my chance is now
To use it for my time: I am a brother
Of gracious order, late come from the See
In special business from his holiness.

ESCALUS:
What news abroad i' the world?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
None, but that there is so great a fever on
goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it:
novelty is only in request; and it is as dangerous
to be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous
to be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce
truth enough alive to make societies secure; but
security enough to make fellowships accurst: much
upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. This
news is old enough, yet it is every day's news. I
pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?

ESCALUS:
One that, above all other strifes, contended
especially to know himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What pleasure was he given to?

ESCALUS:
Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at
any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a
gentleman of all temperance. But leave we him to
his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous;
and let me desire to know how you find Claudio
prepared. I am made to understand that you have
lent him visitation.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He professes to have received no sinister measure
from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself
to the determination of justice: yet had he framed
to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many
deceiving promises of life; which I by my good
leisure have discredited to him, and now is he
resolved to die.

ESCALUS:
You have paid the heavens your function, and the
prisoner the very debt of your calling. I have
laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest
shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have I
found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him
he is indeed Justice.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
If his own life answer the straitness of his
proceeding, it shall become him well; wherein if he
chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.

ESCALUS:
I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you well.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Peace be with you!
He who the sword of heaven will bear
Should be as holy as severe;
Pattern in himself to know,
Grace to stand, and virtue go;
More nor less to others paying
Than by self-offences weighing.
Shame to him whose cruel striking
Kills for faults of his own liking!
Twice treble shame on Angelo,
To weed my vice and let his grow!
O, what may man within him hide,
Though angel on the outward side!
How may likeness made in crimes,
Making practise on the times,
To draw with idle spiders' strings
Most ponderous and substantial things!
Craft against vice I must apply:
With Angelo to-night shall lie
His old betrothed but despised;
So disguise shall, by the disguised,
Pay with falsehood false exacting,
And perform an old contracting.


MARIANA:
Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away:
Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice
Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.
I cry you mercy, sir; and well could wish
You had not found me here so musical:
Let me excuse me, and believe me so,
My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis good; though music oft hath such a charm
To make bad good, and good provoke to harm.
I pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired
for me here to-day? much upon this time have
I promised here to meet.

MARIANA:
You have not been inquired after:
I have sat here all day.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I do constantly believe you. The time is come even
now. I shall crave your forbearance a little: may
be I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.

MARIANA:
I am always bound to you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Very well met, and well come.
What is the news from this good deputy?

ISABELLA:
He hath a garden circummured with brick,
Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd;
And to that vineyard is a planched gate,
That makes his opening with this bigger key:
This other doth command a little door
Which from the vineyard to the garden leads;
There have I made my promise
Upon the heavy middle of the night
To call upon him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
But shall you on your knowledge find this way?

ISABELLA:
I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't:
With whispering and most guilty diligence,
In action all of precept, he did show me
The way twice o'er.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Are there no other tokens
Between you 'greed concerning her observance?

ISABELLA:
No, none, but only a repair i' the dark;
And that I have possess'd him my most stay
Can be but brief; for I have made him know
I have a servant comes with me along,
That stays upon me, whose persuasion is
I come about my brother.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis well borne up.
I have not yet made known to Mariana
A word of this. What, ho! within! come forth!
I pray you, be acquainted with this maid;
She comes to do you good.

ISABELLA:
I do desire the like.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Do you persuade yourself that I respect you?

MARIANA:
Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Take, then, this your companion by the hand,
Who hath a story ready for your ear.
I shall attend your leisure: but make haste;
The vaporous night approaches.

MARIANA:
Will't please you walk aside?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O place and greatness! millions of false eyes
Are stuck upon thee: volumes of report
Run with these false and most contrarious quests
Upon thy doings: thousand escapes of wit
Make thee the father of their idle dreams
And rack thee in their fancies.
Welcome, how agreed?

ISABELLA:
She'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
If you advise it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is not my consent,
But my entreaty too.

ISABELLA:
Little have you to say
When you depart from him, but, soft and low,
'Remember now my brother.'

MARIANA:
Fear me not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all.
He is your husband on a pre-contract:
To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin,
Sith that the justice of your title to him
Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go:
Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.

Provost:
Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's head?

POMPEY:
If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can; but if he be a
married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never
cut off a woman's head.

Provost:
Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a
direct answer. To-morrow morning are to die Claudio
and Barnardine. Here is in our prison a common
executioner, who in his office lacks a helper: if
you will take it on you to assist him, it shall
redeem you from your gyves; if not, you shall have
your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance
with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a
notorious bawd.

POMPEY:
Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind;
but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman. I
would be glad to receive some instruction from my
fellow partner.

Provost:
What, ho! Abhorson! Where's Abhorson, there?

ABHORSON:
Do you call, sir?

Provost:
Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in
your execution. If you think it meet, compound with
him by the year, and let him abide here with you; if
not, use him for the present and dismiss him. He
cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.

ABHORSON:
A bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.

Provost:
Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn
the scale.

POMPEY:
Pray, sir, by your good favour,--for surely, sir, a
good favour you have, but that you have a hanging
look,--do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?

ABHORSON:
Ay, sir; a mystery

POMPEY:
Painting, sir, I have heard say, is a mystery; and
your whores, sir, being members of my occupation,
using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery:
but what mystery there should be in hanging, if I
should be hanged, I cannot imagine.

ABHORSON:
Sir, it is a mystery.

POMPEY:
Proof?

ABHORSON:
Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be
too little for your thief, your true man thinks it
big enough; if it be too big for your thief, your
thief thinks it little enough: so every true man's
apparel fits your thief.

Provost:
Are you agreed?

POMPEY:
Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your hangman is
a more penitent trade than your bawd; he doth
oftener ask forgiveness.

Provost:
You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe
to-morrow four o'clock.

ABHORSON:
Come on, bawd; I will instruct thee in my trade; follow.

POMPEY:
I do desire to learn, sir: and I hope, if you have
occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find
me yare; for truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you
a good turn.

Provost:
Call hither Barnardine and Claudio:
The one has my pity; not a jot the other,
Being a murderer, though he were my brother.
Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death:
'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
Thou must be made immortal. Where's Barnardine?

CLAUDIO:
As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour
When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones:
He will not wake.

Provost:
Who can do good on him?
Well, go, prepare yourself.
But, hark, what noise?
Heaven give your spirits comfort!
By and by.
I hope it is some pardon or reprieve
For the most gentle Claudio.
Welcome father.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The best and wholesomest spirts of the night
Envelope you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late?

Provost:
None, since the curfew rung.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not Isabel?

Provost:
No.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
They will, then, ere't be long.

Provost:
What comfort is for Claudio?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There's some in hope.

Provost:
It is a bitter deputy.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd
Even with the stroke and line of his great justice:
He doth with holy abstinence subdue
That in himself which he spurs on his power
To qualify in others: were he meal'd with that
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous;
But this being so, he's just.
Now are they come.
This is a gentle provost: seldom when
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.
How now! what noise? That spirit's possessed with haste
That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.

Provost:
There he must stay until the officer
Arise to let him in: he is call'd up.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Have you no countermand for Claudio yet,
But he must die to-morrow?

Provost:
None, sir, none.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
As near the dawning, provost, as it is,
You shall hear more ere morning.

Provost:
Happily
You something know; yet I believe there comes
No countermand; no such example have we:
Besides, upon the very siege of justice
Lord Angelo hath to the public ear
Profess'd the contrary.
This is his lordship's man.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
And here comes Claudio's pardon.

Messenger:

Provost:
I shall obey him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

Provost:
I told you. Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss
in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted
putting-on; methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Pray you, let's hear.

Provost:

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in the
afternoon?

Provost:
A Bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred; one
that is a prisoner nine years old.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
How came it that the absent duke had not either
delivered him to his liberty or executed him? I
have heard it was ever his manner to do so.

Provost:
His friends still wrought reprieves for him: and,
indeed, his fact, till now in the government of Lord
Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is now apparent?

Provost:
Most manifest, and not denied by himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Hath he born himself penitently in prison? how
seems he to be touched?

Provost:
A man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but
as a drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and fearless
of what's past, present, or to come; insensible of
mortality, and desperately mortal.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He wants advice.

Provost:
He will hear none: he hath evermore had the liberty
of the prison; give him leave to escape hence, he
would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days
entirely drunk. We have very oft awaked him, as if
to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming
warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
More of him anon. There is written in your brow,
provost, honesty and constancy: if I read it not
truly, my ancient skill beguiles me; but, in the
boldness of my cunning, I will lay myself in hazard.
Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is
no greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath
sentenced him. To make you understand this in a
manifested effect, I crave but four days' respite;
for the which you are to do me both a present and a
dangerous courtesy.

Provost:
Pray, sir, in what?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
In the delaying death.

Provost:
A lack, how may I do it, having the hour limited,
and an express command, under penalty, to deliver
his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case
as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By the vow of mine order I warrant you, if my
instructions may be your guide. Let this Barnardine
be this morning executed, and his head born to Angelo.

Provost:
Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it.
Shave the head, and tie the beard; and say it was
the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his
death: you know the course is common. If any thing
fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good
fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead
against it with my life.

Provost:
Pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?

Provost:
To him, and to his substitutes.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You will think you have made no offence, if the duke
avouch the justice of your dealing?

Provost:
But what likelihood is in that?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since I see
you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor
persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will go
further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you.
Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the
duke: you know the character, I doubt not; and the
signet is not strange to you.

Provost:
I know them both.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The contents of this is the return of the duke: you
shall anon over-read it at your pleasure; where you
shall find, within these two days he will be here.
This is a thing that Angelo knows not; for he this
very day receives letters of strange tenor;
perchance of the duke's death; perchance entering
into some monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what
is writ. Look, the unfolding star calls up the
shepherd. Put not yourself into amazement how these
things should be: all difficulties are but easy
when they are known. Call your executioner, and off
with Barnardine's head: I will give him a present
shrift and advise him for a better place. Yet you
are amazed; but this shall absolutely resolve you.
Come away; it is almost clear dawn.

POMPEY:
I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house
of profession: one would think it were Mistress
Overdone's own house, for here be many of her old
customers. First, here's young Master Rash; he's in
for a commodity of brown paper and old ginger,
ninescore and seventeen pounds; of which he made
five marks, ready money: marry, then ginger was not
much in request, for the old women were all dead.
Then is there here one Master Caper, at the suit of
Master Three-pile the mercer, for some four suits of
peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a
beggar. Then have we here young Dizy, and young
Master Deep-vow, and Master Copperspur, and Master
Starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young
Drop-heir that killed lusty Pudding, and Master
Forthlight the tilter, and brave Master Shooty the
great traveller, and wild Half-can that stabbed
Pots, and, I think, forty more; all great doers in
our trade, and are now 'for the Lord's sake.'

ABHORSON:
Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither.

POMPEY:
Master Barnardine! you must rise and be hanged.
Master Barnardine!

ABHORSON:
What, ho, Barnardine!

BARNARDINE:

POMPEY:
Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must be so
good, sir, to rise and be put to death.

BARNARDINE:

ABHORSON:
Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.

POMPEY:
Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are
executed, and sleep afterwards.

ABHORSON:
Go in to him, and fetch him out.

POMPEY:
He is coming, sir, he is coming; I hear his straw rustle.

ABHORSON:
Is the axe upon the block, sirrah?

POMPEY:
Very ready, sir.

BARNARDINE:
How now, Abhorson? what's the news with you?

ABHORSON:
Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your
prayers; for, look you, the warrant's come.

BARNARDINE:
You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I am not
fitted for 't.

POMPEY:
O, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night,
and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the
sounder all the next day.

ABHORSON:
Look you, sir; here comes your ghostly father: do
we jest now, think you?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily
you are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort
you and pray with you.

BARNARDINE:
Friar, not I I have been drinking hard all night,
and I will have more time to prepare me, or they
shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not
consent to die this day, that's certain.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you
Look forward on the journey you shall go.

BARNARDINE:
I swear I will not die to-day for any man's
persuasion.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
But hear you.

BARNARDINE:
Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me,
come to my ward; for thence will not I to-day.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Unfit to live or die: O gravel heart!
After him, fellows; bring him to the block.

Provost:
Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A creature unprepared, unmeet for death;
And to transport him in the mind he is
Were damnable.

Provost:
Here in the prison, father,
There died this morning of a cruel fever
One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate,
A man of Claudio's years; his beard and head
Just of his colour. What if we do omit
This reprobate till he were well inclined;
And satisfy the deputy with the visage
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, 'tis an accident that heaven provides!
Dispatch it presently; the hour draws on
Prefix'd by Angelo: see this be done,
And sent according to command; whiles I
Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.

Provost:
This shall be done, good father, presently.
But Barnardine must die this afternoon:
And how shall we continue Claudio,
To save me from the danger that might come
If he were known alive?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Let this be done.
Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio:
Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting
To the under generation, you shall find
Your safety manifested.

Provost:
I am your free dependant.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Quick, dispatch, and send the head to Angelo.
Now will I write letters to Angelo,--
The provost, he shall bear them, whose contents
Shall witness to him I am near at home,
And that, by great injunctions, I am bound
To enter publicly: him I'll desire
To meet me at the consecrated fount
A league below the city; and from thence,
By cold gradation and well-balanced form,
We shall proceed with Angelo.

Provost:
Here is the head; I'll carry it myself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Convenient is it. Make a swift return;
For I would commune with you of such things
That want no ear but yours.

Provost:
I'll make all speed.

ISABELLA:

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The tongue of Isabel. She's come to know
If yet her brother's pardon be come hither:
But I will keep her ignorant of her good,
To make her heavenly comforts of despair,
When it is least expected.

ISABELLA:
Ho, by your leave!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

ISABELLA:
The better, given me by so holy a man.
Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He hath released him, Isabel, from the world:
His head is off and sent to Angelo.

ISABELLA:
Nay, but it is not so.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is no other: show your wisdom, daughter,
In your close patience.

ISABELLA:
O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You shall not be admitted to his sight.

ISABELLA:
Unhappy Claudio! wretched Isabel!
Injurious world! most damned Angelo!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot;
Forbear it therefore; give your cause to heaven.
Mark what I say, which you shall find
By every syllable a faithful verity:
The duke comes home to-morrow; nay, dry your eyes;
One of our convent, and his confessor,
Gives me this instance: already he hath carried
Notice to Escalus and Angelo,
Who do prepare to meet him at the gates,
There to give up their power. If you can, pace your wisdom
In that good path that I would wish it go,
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch,
Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart,
And general honour.

ISABELLA:
I am directed by you.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This letter, then, to Friar Peter give;
'Tis that he sent me of the duke's return:
Say, by this token, I desire his company
At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours
I'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you
Before the duke, and to the head of Angelo
Accuse him home and home. For my poor self,
I am combined by a sacred vow
And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter:
Command these fretting waters from your eyes
With a light heart; trust not my holy order,
If I pervert your course. Who's here?

LUCIO:
Good even. Friar, where's the provost?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Not within, sir.

LUCIO:
O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see
thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. I am fain
to dine and sup with water and bran; I dare not for
my head fill my belly; one fruitful meal would set
me to 't. But they say the duke will be here
to-morrow. By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother:
if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been
at home, he had lived.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your
reports; but the best is, he lives not in them.

LUCIO:
Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do:
he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye well.

LUCIO:
Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee
I can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You have told me too many of him already, sir, if
they be true; if not true, none were enough.

LUCIO:
I was once before him for getting a wench with child.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Did you such a thing?

LUCIO:
Yes, marry, did I but I was fain to forswear it;
they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest you well.

LUCIO:
By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end:
if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of
it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I shall stick.

ESCALUS:
Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.

ANGELO:
In most uneven and distracted manner. His actions
show much like to madness: pray heaven his wisdom be
not tainted! And why meet him at the gates, and
redeliver our authorities there

ESCALUS:
I guess not.

ANGELO:
And why should we proclaim it in an hour before his
entering, that if any crave redress of injustice,
they should exhibit their petitions in the street?

ESCALUS:
He shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of
complaints, and to deliver us from devices
hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand
against us.

ANGELO:
Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes
i' the morn; I'll call you at your house: give
notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet
him.

ESCALUS:
I shall, sir. Fare you well.

ANGELO:
Good night.
This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant
And dull to all proceedings. A deflower'd maid!
And by an eminent body that enforced
The law against it! But that her tender shame
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss,
How might she tongue me! Yet reason dares her no;
For my authority bears of a credent bulk,
That no particular scandal once can touch
But it confounds the breather. He should have lived,
Save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense,
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge,
By so receiving a dishonour'd life
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had lived!
A lack, when once our grace we have forgot,
Nothing goes right: we would, and we would not.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
These letters at fit time deliver me
The provost knows our purpose and our plot.
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction,
And hold you ever to our special drift;
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that,
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius' house,
And tell him where I stay: give the like notice
To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus,
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
But send me Flavius first.

FRIAR PETER:
It shall be speeded well.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I thank thee, Varrius; thou hast made good haste:
Come, we will walk. There's other of our friends
Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius.

ISABELLA:
To speak so indirectly I am loath:
I would say the truth; but to accuse him so,
That is your part: yet I am advised to do it;
He says, to veil full purpose.

MARIANA:
Be ruled by him.

ISABELLA:
Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure
He speak against me on the adverse side,
I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic
That's bitter to sweet end.

MARIANA:
I would Friar Peter--

ISABELLA:
O, peace! the friar is come.

FRIAR PETER:
Come, I have found you out a stand most fit,
Where you may have such vantage on the duke,
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets sounded;
The generous and gravest citizens
Have hent the gates, and very near upon
The duke is entering: therefore, hence, away!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
My very worthy cousin, fairly met!
Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.

ANGELO:
Happy return be to your royal grace!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Many and hearty thankings to you both.
We have made inquiry of you; and we hear
Such goodness of your justice, that our soul
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks,
Forerunning more requital.

ANGELO:
You make my bonds still greater.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
O, your desert speaks loud; and I should wrong it,
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom,
When it deserves, with characters of brass,
A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time
And razure of oblivion. Give me your hand,
And let the subject see, to make them know
That outward courtesies would fain proclaim
Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus,
You must walk by us on our other hand;
And good supporters are you.

FRIAR PETER:
Now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.

ISABELLA:
Justice, O royal duke! Vail your regard
Upon a wrong'd, I would fain have said, a maid!
O worthy prince, dishonour not your eye
By throwing it on any other object
Till you have heard me in my true complaint
And given me justice, justice, justice, justice!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Relate your wrongs; in what? by whom? be brief.
Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice:
Reveal yourself to him.

ISABELLA:
O worthy duke,
You bid me seek redemption of the devil:
Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak
Must either punish me, not being believed,
Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here!

ANGELO:
My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm:
She hath been a suitor to me for her brother
Cut off by course of justice,--

ISABELLA:
By course of justice!

ANGELO:
And she will speak most bitterly and strange.

ISABELLA:
Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak:
That Angelo's forsworn; is it not strange?
That Angelo's a murderer; is 't not strange?
That Angelo is an adulterous thief,
An hypocrite, a virgin-violator;
Is it not strange and strange?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Nay, it is ten times strange.

ISABELLA:
It is not truer he is Angelo
Than this is all as true as it is strange:
Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth
To the end of reckoning.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Away with her! Poor soul,
She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.

ISABELLA:
O prince, I conjure thee, as thou believest
There is another comfort than this world,
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion
That I am touch'd with madness! Make not impossible
That which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible
But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground,
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute
As Angelo; even so may Angelo,
In all his dressings, characts, titles, forms,
Be an arch-villain; believe it, royal prince:
If he be less, he's nothing; but he's more,
Had I more name for badness.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By mine honesty,
If she be mad,--as I believe no other,--
Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense,
Such a dependency of thing on thing,
As e'er I heard in madness.

ISABELLA:
O gracious duke,
Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason
For inequality; but let your reason serve
To make the truth appear where it seems hid,
And hide the false seems true.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Many that are not mad
Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say?

ISABELLA:
I am the sister of one Claudio,
Condemn'd upon the act of fornication
To lose his head; condemn'd by Angelo:
I, in probation of a sisterhood,
Was sent to by my brother; one Lucio
As then the messenger,--

LUCIO:
That's I, an't like your grace:
I came to her from Claudio, and desired her
To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo
For her poor brother's pardon.

ISABELLA:
That's he indeed.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You were not bid to speak.

LUCIO:
No, my good lord;
Nor wish'd to hold my peace.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I wish you now, then;
Pray you, take note of it: and when you have
A business for yourself, pray heaven you then
Be perfect.

LUCIO:
I warrant your honour.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
The warrants for yourself; take heed to't.

ISABELLA:
This gentleman told somewhat of my tale,--

LUCIO:
Right.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It may be right; but you are i' the wrong
To speak before your time. Proceed.

ISABELLA:
I went
To this pernicious caitiff deputy,--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
That's somewhat madly spoken.

ISABELLA:
Pardon it;
The phrase is to the matter.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Mended again. The matter; proceed.

ISABELLA:
In brief, to set the needless process by,
How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd,
How he refell'd me, and how I replied,--
For this was of much length,--the vile conclusion
I now begin with grief and shame to utter:
He would not, but by gift of my chaste body
To his concupiscible intemperate lust,
Release my brother; and, after much debatement,
My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour,
And I did yield to him: but the next morn betimes,
His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant
For my poor brother's head.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This is most likely!

ISABELLA:
O, that it were as like as it is true!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
By heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st,
Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour
In hateful practise. First, his integrity
Stands without blemish. Next, it imports no reason
That with such vehemency he should pursue
Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended,
He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself
And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on:
Confess the truth, and say by whose advice
Thou camest here to complain.

ISABELLA:
And is this all?
Then, O you blessed ministers above,
Keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up
In countenance! Heaven shield your grace from woe,
As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I know you'ld fain be gone. An officer!
To prison with her! Shall we thus permit
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall
On him so near us? This needs must be a practise.
Who knew of Your intent and coming hither?

ISABELLA:
One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick?

LUCIO:
My lord, I know him; 'tis a meddling friar;
I do not like the man: had he been lay, my lord
For certain words he spake against your grace
In your retirement, I had swinged him soundly.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Words against me? this is a good friar, belike!
And to set on this wretched woman here
Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

LUCIO:
But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar,
I saw them at the prison: a saucy friar,
A very scurvy fellow.

FRIAR PETER:
Blessed be your royal grace!
I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard
Your royal ear abused. First, hath this woman
Most wrongfully accused your substitute,
Who is as free from touch or soil with her
As she from one ungot.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
We did believe no less.
Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of?

FRIAR PETER:
I know him for a man divine and holy;
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler,
As he's reported by this gentleman;
And, on my trust, a man that never yet
Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.

LUCIO:
My lord, most villanously; believe it.

FRIAR PETER:
Well, he in time may come to clear himself;
But at this instant he is sick my lord,
Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request,
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint
Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither,
To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know
Is true and false; and what he with his oath
And all probation will make up full clear,
Whensoever he's convented. First, for this woman.
To justify this worthy nobleman,
So vulgarly and personally accused,
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
Till she herself confess it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Good friar, let's hear it.
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo?
O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools!
Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo;
In this I'll be impartial; be you judge
Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar?
First, let her show her face, and after speak.

MARIANA:
Pardon, my lord; I will not show my face
Until my husband bid me.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What, are you married?

MARIANA:
No, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Are you a maid?

MARIANA:
No, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
A widow, then?

MARIANA:
Neither, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow, nor wife?

LUCIO:
My lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are
neither maid, widow, nor wife.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Silence that fellow: I would he had some cause
To prattle for himself.

LUCIO:
Well, my lord.

MARIANA:
My lord; I do confess I ne'er was married;
And I confess besides I am no maid:
I have known my husband; yet my husband
Knows not that ever he knew me.

LUCIO:
He was drunk then, my lord: it can be no better.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!

LUCIO:
Well, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
This is no witness for Lord Angelo.

MARIANA:
Now I come to't my lord
She that accuses him of fornication,
In self-same manner doth accuse my husband,
And charges him my lord, with such a time
When I'll depose I had him in mine arms
With all the effect of love.

ANGELO:
Charges she more than me?

MARIANA:
Not that I know.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
No? you say your husband.

MARIANA:
Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo,
Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body,
But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.

ANGELO:
This is a strange abuse. Let's see thy face.

MARIANA:
My husband bids me; now I will unmask.
This is that face, thou cruel Angelo,
Which once thou sworest was worth the looking on;
This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract,
Was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body
That took away the match from Isabel,
And did supply thee at thy garden-house
In her imagined person.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Know you this woman?

LUCIO:
Carnally, she says.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Sirrah, no more!

LUCIO:
Enough, my lord.

ANGELO:
My lord, I must confess I know this woman:
And five years since there was some speech of marriage
Betwixt myself and her; which was broke off,
Partly for that her promised proportions
Came short of composition, but in chief
For that her reputation was disvalued
In levity: since which time of five years
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her,
Upon my faith and honour.

MARIANA:
Noble prince,
As there comes light from heaven and words from breath,
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue,
I am affianced this man's wife as strongly
As words could make up vows: and, my good lord,
But Tuesday night last gone in's garden-house
He knew me as a wife. As this is true,
Let me in safety raise me from my knees
Or else for ever be confixed here,
A marble monument!

ANGELO:
I did but smile till now:
Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice
My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive
These poor informal women are no more
But instruments of some more mightier member
That sets them on: let me have way, my lord,
To find this practise out.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Ay, with my heart
And punish them to your height of pleasure.
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman,
Compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths,
Though they would swear down each particular saint,
Were testimonies against his worth and credit
That's seal'd in approbation? You, Lord Escalus,
Sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains
To find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived.
There is another friar that set them on;
Let him be sent for.

FRIAR PETER:
Would he were here, my lord! for he indeed
Hath set the women on to this complaint:
Your provost knows the place where he abides
And he may fetch him.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Go do it instantly.
And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin,
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth,
Do with your injuries as seems you best,
In any chastisement: I for a while will leave you;
But stir not you till you have well determined
Upon these slanderers.

ESCALUS:
My lord, we'll do it throughly.
Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that
Friar Lodowick to be a dishonest person?

LUCIO:
'Cucullus non facit monachum:' honest in nothing
but in his clothes; and one that hath spoke most
villanous speeches of the duke.

ESCALUS:
We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and
enforce them against him: we shall find this friar a
notable fellow.

LUCIO:
As any in Vienna, on my word.

ESCALUS:
Call that same Isabel here once again; I would speak with her.
Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you
shall see how I'll handle her.

LUCIO:
Not better than he, by her own report.

ESCALUS:
Say you?

LUCIO:
Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately,
she would sooner confess: perchance, publicly,
she'll be ashamed.

ESCALUS:
I will go darkly to work with her.

LUCIO:
That's the way; for women are light at midnight.

ESCALUS:
Come on, mistress: here's a gentlewoman denies all
that you have said.

LUCIO:
My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of; here with
the provost.

ESCALUS:
In very good time: speak not you to him till we
call upon you.

LUCIO:
Mum.

ESCALUS:
Come, sir: did you set these women on to slander
Lord Angelo? they have confessed you did.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
'Tis false.

ESCALUS:
How! know you where you are?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Respect to your great place! and let the devil
Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne!
Where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.

ESCALUS:
The duke's in us; and we will hear you speak:
Look you speak justly.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Boldly, at least. But, O, poor souls,
Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox?
Good night to your redress! Is the duke gone?
Then is your cause gone too. The duke's unjust,
Thus to retort your manifest appeal,
And put your trial in the villain's mouth
Which here you come to accuse.

LUCIO:
This is the rascal; this is he I spoke of.

ESCALUS:
Why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar,
Is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth
And in the witness of his proper ear,
To call him villain? and then to glance from him
To the duke himself, to tax him with injustice?
Take him hence; to the rack with him! We'll touse you
Joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
What 'unjust'!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Be not so hot; the duke
Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he
Dare rack his own: his subject am I not,
Nor here provincial. My business in this state
Made me a looker on here in Vienna,
Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble
Till it o'er-run the stew; laws for all faults,
But faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes
Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
As much in mock as mark.

ESCALUS:
Slander to the state! Away with him to prison!

ANGELO:
What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio?
Is this the man that you did tell us of?

LUCIO:
'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman baldpate:
do you know me?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: I
met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.

LUCIO:
O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of the duke?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Most notedly, sir.

LUCIO:
Do you so, sir? And was the duke a fleshmonger, a
fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You must, sir, change persons with me, ere you make
that my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him; and
much more, much worse.

LUCIO:
O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the
nose for thy speeches?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I protest I love the duke as I love myself.

ANGELO:
Hark, how the villain would close now, after his
treasonable abuses!

ESCALUS:
Such a fellow is not to be talked withal. Away with
him to prison! Where is the provost? Away with him
to prison! lay bolts enough upon him: let him
speak no more. Away with those giglots too, and
with the other confederate companion!

DUKE VINCENTIO:

ANGELO:
What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.

LUCIO:
Come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! Why, you
bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must
you? Show your knave's visage, with a pox to you!
show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour!
Will't not off?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Thou art the first knave that e'er madest a duke.
First, provost, let me bail these gentle three.
Sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you
Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him.

LUCIO:
This may prove worse than hanging.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

ANGELO:
O my dread lord,
I should be guiltier than my guiltiness,
To think I can be undiscernible,
When I perceive your grace, like power divine,
Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good prince,
No longer session hold upon my shame,
But let my trial be mine own confession:
Immediate sentence then and sequent death
Is all the grace I beg.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Come hither, Mariana.
Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?

ANGELO:
I was, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Go take her hence, and marry her instantly.
Do you the office, friar; which consummate,
Return him here again. Go with him, provost.

ESCALUS:
My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour
Than at the strangeness of it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Come hither, Isabel.
Your friar is now your prince: as I was then
Advertising and holy to your business,
Not changing heart with habit, I am still
Attorney'd at your service.

ISABELLA:
O, give me pardon,
That I, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd
Your unknown sovereignty!

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You are pardon'd, Isabel:
And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.
Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart;
And you may marvel why I obscured myself,
Labouring to save his life, and would not rather
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid,
It was the swift celerity of his death,
Which I did think with slower foot came on,
That brain'd my purpose. But, peace be with him!
That life is better life, past fearing death,
Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort,
So happy is your brother.

ISABELLA:
I do, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For this new-married man approaching here,
Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd
Your well defended honour, you must pardon
For Mariana's sake: but as he adjudged your brother,--
Being criminal, in double violation
Of sacred chastity and of promise-breach
Thereon dependent, for your brother's life,--
The very mercy of the law cries out
Most audible, even from his proper tongue,
'An Angelo for Claudio, death for death!'
Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure;
Like doth quit like, and MEASURE still FOR MEASURE.
Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested;
Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.
We do condemn thee to the very block
Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.
Away with him!

MARIANA:
O my most gracious lord,
I hope you will not mock me with a husband.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
It is your husband mock'd you with a husband.
Consenting to the safeguard of your honour,
I thought your marriage fit; else imputation,
For that he knew you, might reproach your life
And choke your good to come; for his possessions,
Although by confiscation they are ours,
We do instate and widow you withal,
To buy you a better husband.

MARIANA:
O my dear lord,
I crave no other, nor no better man.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Never crave him; we are definitive.

MARIANA:
Gentle my liege,--

DUKE VINCENTIO:
You do but lose your labour.
Away with him to death!
Now, sir, to you.

MARIANA:
O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part;
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come
I'll lend you all my life to do you service.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Against all sense you do importune her:
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact,
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break,
And take her hence in horror.

MARIANA:
Isabel,
Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me;
Hold up your hands, say nothing; I'll speak all.
They say, best men are moulded out of faults;
And, for the most, become much more the better
For being a little bad: so may my husband.
O Isabel, will you not lend a knee?

DUKE VINCENTIO:
He dies for Claudio's death.

ISABELLA:
Most bounteous sir,
Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd,
As if my brother lived: I partly think
A due sincerity govern'd his deeds,
Till he did look on me: since it is so,
Let him not die. My brother had but justice,
In that he did the thing for which he died:
For Angelo,
His act did not o'ertake his bad intent,
And must be buried but as an intent
That perish'd by the way: thoughts are no subjects;
Intents but merely thoughts.

MARIANA:
Merely, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Your suit's unprofitable; stand up, I say.
I have bethought me of another fault.
Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded
At an unusual hour?

Provost:
It was commanded so.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Had you a special warrant for the deed?

Provost:
No, my good lord; it was by private message.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
For which I do discharge you of your office:
Give up your keys.

Provost:
Pardon me, noble lord:
I thought it was a fault, but knew it not;
Yet did repent me, after more advice;
For testimony whereof, one in the prison,
That should by private order else have died,
I have reserved alive.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
What's he?

Provost:
His name is Barnardine.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
I would thou hadst done so by Claudio.
Go fetch him hither; let me look upon him.

ESCALUS:
I am sorry, one so learned and so wise
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd,
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood.
And lack of temper'd judgment afterward.

ANGELO:
I am sorry that such sorrow I procure:
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart
That I crave death more willingly than mercy;
'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Which is that Barnardine?

Provost:
This, my lord.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
There was a friar told me of this man.
Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul.
That apprehends no further than this world,
And squarest thy life according. Thou'rt condemn'd:
But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all;
And pray thee take this mercy to provide
For better times to come. Friar, advise him;
I leave him to your hand. What muffled fellow's that?

Provost:
This is another prisoner that I saved.
Who should have died when Claudio lost his head;
As like almost to Claudio as himself.

DUKE VINCENTIO:

LUCIO:
'Faith, my lord. I spoke it but according to the
trick. If you will hang me for it, you may; but I
had rather it would please you I might be whipt.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Whipt first, sir, and hanged after.
Proclaim it, provost, round about the city.
Is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow,
As I have heard him swear himself there's one
Whom he begot with child, let her appear,
And he shall marry her: the nuptial finish'd,
Let him be whipt and hang'd.

LUCIO:
I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.
Your highness said even now, I made you a duke:
good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her.
Thy slanders I forgive; and therewithal
Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison;
And see our pleasure herein executed.

LUCIO:
Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death,
whipping, and hanging.

DUKE VINCENTIO:
Slandering a prince deserves it.
She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore.
Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo:
I have confess'd her and I know her virtue.
Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness:
There's more behind that is more gratulate.
Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy:
We shill employ thee in a worthier place.
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home
The head of Ragozine for Claudio's:
The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel,
I have a motion much imports your good;
Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline,
What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine.
So, bring us to our palace; where we'll show
What's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.

SLY:
I'll pheeze you, in faith.

Hostess:
A pair of stocks, you rogue!

SLY:
Ye are a baggage: the Slys are no rogues; look in
the chronicles; we came in with Richard Conqueror.
Therefore paucas pallabris; let the world slide: sessa!

Hostess:
You will not pay for the glasses you have burst?

SLY:
No, not a denier. Go by, Jeronimy: go to thy cold
bed, and warm thee.

Hostess:
I know my remedy; I must go fetch the
third--borough.

SLY:
Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him
by law: I'll not budge an inch, boy: let him come,
and kindly.

Lord:
Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds:
Brach Merriman, the poor cur is emboss'd;
And couple Clowder with the deep--mouth'd brach.
Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good
At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault?
I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.

First Huntsman:
Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord;
He cried upon it at the merest loss
And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent:
Trust me, I take him for the better dog.

Lord:
Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet,
I would esteem him worth a dozen such.
But sup them well and look unto them all:
To-morrow I intend to hunt again.

First Huntsman:
I will, my lord.

Lord:
What's here? one dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe?

Second Huntsman:
He breathes, my lord. Were he not warm'd with ale,
This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.

Lord:
O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies!
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image!
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.
What think you, if he were convey'd to bed,
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers,
A most delicious banquet by his bed,
And brave attendants near him when he wakes,
Would not the beggar then forget himself?

First Huntsman:
Believe me, lord, I think he cannot choose.

Second Huntsman:
It would seem strange unto him when he waked.

Lord:
Even as a flattering dream or worthless fancy.
Then take him up and manage well the jest:
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber
And hang it round with all my wanton pictures:
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters
And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet:
Procure me music ready when he wakes,
To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound;
And if he chance to speak, be ready straight
And with a low submissive reverence
Say 'What is it your honour will command?'
Let one attend him with a silver basin
Full of rose-water and bestrew'd with flowers,
Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper,
And say 'Will't please your lordship cool your hands?'
Some one be ready with a costly suit
And ask him what apparel he will wear;
Another tell him of his hounds and horse,
And that his lady mourns at his disease:
Persuade him that he hath been lunatic;
And when he says he is, say that he dreams,
For he is nothing but a mighty lord.
This do and do it kindly, gentle sirs:
It will be pastime passing excellent,
If it be husbanded with modesty.

First Huntsman:
My lord, I warrant you we will play our part,
As he shall think by our true diligence
He is no less than what we say he is.

Lord:
Take him up gently and to bed with him;
And each one to his office when he wakes.
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds:
Belike, some noble gentleman that means,
Travelling some journey, to repose him here.
How now! who is it?

Servant:
An't please your honour, players
That offer service to your lordship.

Lord:
Bid them come near.
Now, fellows, you are welcome.

Players:
We thank your honour.

Lord:
Do you intend to stay with me tonight?

A Player:
So please your lordship to accept our duty.

Lord:
With all my heart. This fellow I remember,
Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son:
'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well:
I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part
Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd.

A Player:
I think 'twas Soto that your honour means.

Lord:
'Tis very true: thou didst it excellent.
Well, you are come to me in a happy time;
The rather for I have some sport in hand
Wherein your cunning can assist me much.
There is a lord will hear you play to-night:
But I am doubtful of your modesties;
Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior,--
For yet his honour never heard a play--
You break into some merry passion
And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs,
If you should smile he grows impatient.

A Player:
Fear not, my lord: we can contain ourselves,
Were he the veriest antic in the world.

Lord:
Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery,
And give them friendly welcome every one:
Let them want nothing that my house affords.
Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page,
And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady:
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber;
And call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.
Tell him from me, as he will win my love,
He bear himself with honourable action,
Such as he hath observed in noble ladies
Unto their lords, by them accomplished:
Such duty to the drunkard let him do
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy,
And say 'What is't your honour will command,
Wherein your lady and your humble wife
May show her duty and make known her love?'
And then with kind embracements, tempting kisses,
And with declining head into his bosom,
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoy'd
To see her noble lord restored to health,
Who for this seven years hath esteem'd him
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar:
And if the boy have not a woman's gift
To rain a shower of commanded tears,
An onion will do well for such a shift,
Which in a napkin being close convey'd
Shall in despite enforce a watery eye.
See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst:
Anon I'll give thee more instructions.
I know the boy will well usurp the grace,
Voice, gait and action of a gentlewoman:
I long to hear him call the drunkard husband,
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter
When they do homage to this simple peasant.
I'll in to counsel them; haply my presence
May well abate the over-merry spleen
Which otherwise would grow into extremes.

SLY:
For God's sake, a pot of small ale.

First Servant:
Will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?

Second Servant:
Will't please your honour taste of these conserves?

Third Servant:
What raiment will your honour wear to-day?

SLY:
I am Christophero Sly; call not me 'honour' nor
'lordship:' I ne'er drank sack in my life; and if
you give me any conserves, give me conserves of
beef: ne'er ask me what raiment I'll wear; for I
have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings
than legs, nor no more shoes than feet; nay,
sometimes more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my
toes look through the over-leather.

Lord:
Heaven cease this idle humour in your honour!
O, that a mighty man of such descent,
Of such possessions and so high esteem,
Should be infused with so foul a spirit!

SLY:
What, would you make me mad? Am not I Christopher
Sly, old Sly's son of Burtonheath, by birth a
pedlar, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a
bear-herd, and now by present profession a tinker?
Ask Marian Hacket, the fat ale-wife of Wincot, if
she know me not: if she say I am not fourteen pence
on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the
lyingest knave in Christendom. What! I am not
bestraught: here's--

Third Servant:
O, this it is that makes your lady mourn!

Second Servant:
O, this is it that makes your servants droop!

Lord:
Hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house,
As beaten hence by your strange lunacy.
O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth,
Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment
And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.
Look how thy servants do attend on thee,
Each in his office ready at thy beck.
Wilt thou have music? hark! Apollo plays,
And twenty caged nightingales do sing:
Or wilt thou sleep? we'll have thee to a couch
Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed
On purpose trimm'd up for Semiramis.
Say thou wilt walk; we will bestrew the ground:
Or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapp'd,
Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.
Dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar
Above the morning lark or wilt thou hunt?
Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them
And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.

First Servant:
Say thou wilt course; thy greyhounds are as swift
As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.

Second Servant:
Dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straight
Adonis painted by a running brook,
And Cytherea all in sedges hid,
Which seem to move and wanton with her breath,
Even as the waving sedges play with wind.

Lord:
We'll show thee Io as she was a maid,
And how she was beguiled and surprised,
As lively painted as the deed was done.

Third Servant:
Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood,
Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds,
And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep,
So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.

Lord:
Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord:
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful
Than any woman in this waning age.

First Servant:
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee
Like envious floods o'er-run her lovely face,
She was the fairest creature in the world;
And yet she is inferior to none.

SLY:
Am I a lord? and have I such a lady?
Or do I dream? or have I dream'd till now?
I do not sleep: I see, I hear, I speak;
I smell sweet savours and I feel soft things:
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed
And not a tinker nor Christophero Sly.
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight;
And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.

Second Servant:
Will't please your mightiness to wash your hands?
O, how we joy to see your wit restored!
O, that once more you knew but what you are!
These fifteen years you have been in a dream;
Or when you waked, so waked as if you slept.

SLY:
These fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap.
But did I never speak of all that time?

First Servant:
O, yes, my lord, but very idle words:
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber,
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door;
And rail upon the hostess of the house;
And say you would present her at the leet,
Because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts:
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Hacket.

SLY:
Ay, the woman's maid of the house.

Third Servant:
Why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid,
Nor no such men as you have reckon'd up,
As Stephen Sly and did John Naps of Greece
And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell
And twenty more such names and men as these
Which never were nor no man ever saw.

SLY:
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends!

ALL:
Amen.

SLY:
I thank thee: thou shalt not lose by it.

Page:
How fares my noble lord?

SLY:
Marry, I fare well for here is cheer enough.
Where is my wife?

Page:
Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her?

SLY:
Are you my wife and will not call me husband?
My men should call me 'lord:' I am your goodman.

Page:
My husband and my lord, my lord and husband;
I am your wife in all obedience.

SLY:
I know it well. What must I call her?

Lord:
Madam.

SLY:
Al'ce madam, or Joan madam?

Lord:
'Madam,' and nothing else: so lords
call ladies.

SLY:
Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd
And slept above some fifteen year or more.

Page:
Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me,
Being all this time abandon'd from your bed.

SLY:
'Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone.
Madam, undress you and come now to bed.

Page:
Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you
To pardon me yet for a night or two,
Or, if not so, until the sun be set:
For your physicians have expressly charged,
In peril to incur your former malady,
That I should yet absent me from your bed:
I hope this reason stands for my excuse.

SLY:
Ay, it stands so that I may hardly
tarry so long. But I would be loath to fall into
my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in
despite of the flesh and the blood.

Messenger:
Your honour's players, heating your amendment,
Are come to play a pleasant comedy;
For so your doctors hold it very meet,
Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood,
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy:
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment,
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.

SLY:
Marry, I will, let them play it. Is not a
comondy a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?

Page:
No, my good lord; it is more pleasing stuff.

SLY:
What, household stuff?

Page:
It is a kind of history.

SLY:
Well, well see't. Come, madam wife, sit by my side
and let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, since for the great desire I had
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts,
I am arrived for fruitful Lombardy,
The pleasant garden of great Italy;
And by my father's love and leave am arm'd
With his good will and thy good company,
My trusty servant, well approved in all,
Here let us breathe and haply institute
A course of learning and ingenious studies.
Pisa renown'd for grave citizens
Gave me my being and my father first,
A merchant of great traffic through the world,
Vincetino come of Bentivolii.
Vincetino's son brought up in Florence
It shall become to serve all hopes conceived,
To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds:
And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study,
Virtue and that part of philosophy
Will I apply that treats of happiness
By virtue specially to be achieved.
Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left
And am to Padua come, as he that leaves
A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep
And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.

TRANIO:
Mi perdonato, gentle master mine,
I am in all affected as yourself;
Glad that you thus continue your resolve
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.
Only, good master, while we do admire
This virtue and this moral discipline,
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray;
Or so devote to Aristotle's cheques
As Ovid be an outcast quite abjured:
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have
And practise rhetoric in your common talk;
Music and poesy use to quicken you;
The mathematics and the metaphysics,
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you;
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en:
In brief, sir, study what you most affect.

LUCENTIO:
Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore,
We could at once put us in readiness,
And take a lodging fit to entertain
Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.
But stay a while: what company is this?

TRANIO:
Master, some show to welcome us to town.

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, importune me no farther,
For how I firmly am resolved you know;
That is, not bestow my youngest daughter
Before I have a husband for the elder:
If either of you both love Katharina,
Because I know you well and love you well,
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.

GREMIO:

KATHARINA:
I pray you, sir, is it your will
To make a stale of me amongst these mates?

HORTENSIO:
Mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates for you,
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould.

KATHARINA:
I'faith, sir, you shall never need to fear:
I wis it is not half way to her heart;
But if it were, doubt not her care should be
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool
And paint your face and use you like a fool.

HORTENSIA:
From all such devils, good Lord deliver us!

GREMIO:
And me too, good Lord!

TRANIO:
Hush, master! here's some good pastime toward:
That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.

LUCENTIO:
But in the other's silence do I see
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio!

TRANIO:
Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill.

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, that I may soon make good
What I have said, Bianca, get you in:
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca,
For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.

KATHARINA:
A pretty peat! it is best
Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.

BIANCA:
Sister, content you in my discontent.
Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe:
My books and instruments shall be my company,
On them to took and practise by myself.

LUCENTIO:
Hark, Tranio! thou may'st hear Minerva speak.

HORTENSIO:
Signior Baptista, will you be so strange?
Sorry am I that our good will effects
Bianca's grief.

GREMIO:
Why will you mew her up,
Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell,
And make her bear the penance of her tongue?

BAPTISTA:
Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolved:
Go in, Bianca:
And for I know she taketh most delight
In music, instruments and poetry,
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house,
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio,
Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such,
Prefer them hither; for to cunning men
I will be very kind, and liberal
To mine own children in good bringing up:
And so farewell. Katharina, you may stay;
For I have more to commune with Bianca.

KATHARINA:
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What,
shall I be appointed hours; as though, belike, I
knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?

GREMIO:
You may go to the devil's dam: your gifts are so
good, here's none will hold you. Their love is not
so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails
together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on
both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my
sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit
man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will
wish him to her father.

HORTENSIO:
So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray.
Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked
parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both,
that we may yet again have access to our fair
mistress and be happy rivals in Bianco's love, to
labour and effect one thing specially.

GREMIO:
What's that, I pray?

HORTENSIO:
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.

GREMIO:
A husband! a devil.

HORTENSIO:
I say, a husband.

GREMIO:
I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though
her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool
to be married to hell?

HORTENSIO:
Tush, Gremio, though it pass your patience and mine
to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good
fellows in the world, an a man could light on them,
would take her with all faults, and money enough.

GREMIO:
I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with
this condition, to be whipped at the high cross
every morning.

HORTENSIO:
Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten
apples. But come; since this bar in law makes us
friends, it shall be so far forth friendly
maintained all by helping Baptista's eldest daughter
to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband,
and then have to't a fresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring.
How say you, Signior Gremio?

GREMIO:
I am agreed; and would I had given him the best
horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would
thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the
house of her! Come on.

TRANIO:
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?

LUCENTIO:
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely;
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness:
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the queen of Carthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.

TRANIO:
Master, it is no time to chide you now;
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so,
'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.'

LUCENTIO:
Gramercies, lad, go forward; this contents:
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.

TRANIO:
Master, you look'd so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.

LUCENTIO:
O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand.
When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand.

TRANIO:
Saw you no more? mark'd you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move
And with her breath she did perfume the air:
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.

TRANIO:
Nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home;
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up,
Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors.

LUCENTIO:
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he!
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?

TRANIO:
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now 'tis plotted.

LUCENTIO:
I have it, Tranio.

TRANIO:
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.

LUCENTIO:
Tell me thine first.

TRANIO:
You will be schoolmaster
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
That's your device.

LUCENTIO:
It is: may it be done?

TRANIO:
Not possible; for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son,
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his countrymen and banquet them?

LUCENTIO:
Basta; content thee, for I have it full.
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we lie distinguish'd by our faces
For man or master; then it follows thus;
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
Keep house and port and servants as I should:
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatch'd and shall be so: Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colour'd hat and cloak:
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.

TRANIO:
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient;
For so your father charged me at our parting,
'Be serviceable to my son,' quoth he,
Although I think 'twas in another sense;
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves:
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid
Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.
Sirrah, where have you been?

BIONDELLO:
Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or
you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?

LUCENTIO:
Sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my countenance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I kill'd a man and fear I was descried:
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life:
You understand me?

BIONDELLO:
I, sir! ne'er a whit.

LUCENTIO:
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.

BIONDELLO:
The better for him: would I were so too!

TRANIO:
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I advise
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies:
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
But in all places else your master Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Tranio, let's go: one thing more rests, that
thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if
thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good
and weighty.

First Servant:
My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.

SLY:
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely:
comes there any more of it?

Page:
My lord, 'tis but begun.

SLY:
'Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady:
would 'twere done!

PETRUCHIO:
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here, sirrah Grumio; knock, I say.

GRUMIO:
Knock, sir! whom should I knock? is there man has
rebused your worship?

PETRUCHIO:
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.

GRUMIO:
Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am I, sir, that
I should knock you here, sir?

PETRUCHIO:
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.

GRUMIO:
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock
you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.

PETRUCHIO:
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it;
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.

GRUMIO:
Help, masters, help! my master is mad.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!

HORTENSIO:
How now! what's the matter? My old friend Grumio!
and my good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
'Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato,' may I say.

HORTENSIO:
'Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor
mio Petruchio.' Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound
this quarrel.

GRUMIO:
Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin.
if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his
service, look you, sir, he bid me knock him and rap
him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for a servant to
use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see,
two and thirty, a pip out? Whom would to God I had
well knock'd at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.

PETRUCHIO:
A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate
And could not get him for my heart to do it.

GRUMIO:
Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake you not these
words plain, 'Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here,
knock me well, and knock me soundly'? And come you
now with, 'knocking at the gate'?

PETRUCHIO:
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, patience; I am Grumio's pledge:
Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?

PETRUCHIO:
Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
To seek their fortunes farther than at home
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased;
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may:
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife?
Thou'ldst thank me but a little for my counsel:
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich
And very rich: but thou'rt too much my friend,
And I'll not wish thee to her.

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife,
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
Be she as foul as was Florentius' love,
As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd
As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
Affection's edge in me, were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas:
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.

GRUMIO:
Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his
mind is: Why give him gold enough and marry him to
a puppet or an aglet-baby; or an old trot with ne'er
a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases
as two and fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss,
so money comes withal.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in,
I will continue that I broach'd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman:
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure
That, were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold.

PETRUCHIO:
Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect:
Tell me her father's name and 'tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.

HORTENSIO:
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman:
Her name is Katharina Minola,
Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.

PETRUCHIO:
I know her father, though I know not her;
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.

GRUMIO:
I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
O' my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she
would think scolding would do little good upon him:
she may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so:
why, that's nothing; an he begin once, he'll rail in
his rope-tricks. I'll tell you what sir, an she
stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in
her face and so disfigure her with it that she
shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.
You know him not, sir.

HORTENSIO:
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptista's keep my treasure is:
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Binaca,
And her withholds from me and other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love,
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katharina will be woo'd;
Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katharina the curst have got a husband.

GRUMIO:
Katharina the curst!
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.

HORTENSIO:
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
That so I may, by this device, at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her
And unsuspected court her by herself.

GRUMIO:
Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks,
how the young folks lay their heads together!
Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha?

HORTENSIO:
Peace, Grumio! it is the rival of my love.
Petruchio, stand by a while.

GRUMIO:
A proper stripling and an amorous!

GREMIO:
O, very well; I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir: I'll have them very fairly bound:
All books of love, see that at any hand;
And see you read no other lectures to her:
You understand me: over and beside
Signior Baptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?

LUCENTIO:
Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as yourself were still in place:
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.

GREMIO:
O this learning, what a thing it is!

GRUMIO:
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!

PETRUCHIO:
Peace, sirrah!

HORTENSIO:
Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.

GREMIO:
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca:
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man, for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.

HORTENSIO:
'Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promised me to help me to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.

GREMIO:
Beloved of me; and that my deeds shall prove.

GRUMIO:
And that his bags shall prove.

HORTENSIO:
Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love:
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katharina,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.

GREMIO:
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?

PETRUCHIO:
I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.

GREMIO:
No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman?

PETRUCHIO:
Born in Verona, old Antonio's son:
My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
And I do hope good days and long to see.

GREMIO:
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
But if you have a stomach, to't i' God's name:
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?

PETRUCHIO:
Will I live?

GRUMIO:
Will he woo her? ay, or I'll hang her.

PETRUCHIO:
Why came I hither but to that intent?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea puff'd up with winds
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire?
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.

GRUMIO:
For he fears none.

GREMIO:
Hortensio, hark:
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.

HORTENSIO:
I promised we would be contributors
And bear his charging of wooing, whatsoe'er.

GREMIO:
And so we will, provided that he win her.

GRUMIO:
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.

TRANIO:
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?

BIONDELLO:
He that has the two fair daughters: is't he you mean?

TRANIO:
Even he, Biondello.

GREMIO:
Hark you, sir; you mean not her to--

TRANIO:
Perhaps, him and her, sir: what have you to do?

PETRUCHIO:
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.

TRANIO:
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, let's away.

LUCENTIO:
Well begun, Tranio.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, a word ere you go;
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?

TRANIO:
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?

GREMIO:
No; if without more words you will get you hence.

TRANIO:
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you?

GREMIO:
But so is not she.

TRANIO:
For what reason, I beseech you?

GREMIO:
For this reason, if you'll know,
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.

HORTENSIO:
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio.

TRANIO:
Softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
Do me this right; hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman,
To whom my father is not all unknown;
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have and me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have:
And so she shall; Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.

GREMIO:
What! this gentleman will out-talk us all.

LUCENTIO:
Sir, give him head: I know he'll prove a jade.

PETRUCHIO:
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?

HORTENSIO:
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter?

TRANIO:
No, sir; but hear I do that he hath two,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.

GREMIO:
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules;
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, understand you this of me in sooth:
The youngest daughter whom you hearken for
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
And will not promise her to any man
Until the elder sister first be wed:
The younger then is free and not before.

TRANIO:
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all and me amongst the rest,
And if you break the ice and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, you say well and well you do conceive;
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.

TRANIO:
Sir, I shall not be slack: in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.

GRUMIO:
O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be gone.

HORTENSIO:
The motion's good indeed and be it so,
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.

BIANCA:
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me;
That I disdain: but for these other gawds,
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.

KATHARINA:
Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell
Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not.

BIANCA:
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.

KATHARINA:
Minion, thou liest. Is't not Hortensio?

BIANCA:
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have
him.

KATHARINA:
O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.

BIANCA:
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while:
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.

KATHARINA:
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.

BAPTISTA:
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps.
Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?

KATHARINA:
Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged.

BAPTISTA:
What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.

KATHARINA:
What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep
Till I can find occasion of revenge.

BAPTISTA:
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here?

GREMIO:
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.

BAPTISTA:
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
God save you, gentlemen!

PETRUCHIO:
And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
Call'd Katharina, fair and virtuous?

BAPTISTA:
I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina.

GREMIO:
You are too blunt: go to it orderly.

PETRUCHIO:
You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant:
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong:
His name is Licio, born in Mantua.

BAPTISTA:
You're welcome, sir; and he, for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katharina, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.

PETRUCHIO:
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.

BAPTISTA:
Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name?

PETRUCHIO:
Petruchio is my name; Antonio's son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.

BAPTISTA:
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.

GREMIO:
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too:
Baccare! you are marvellous forward.

PETRUCHIO:
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio; I would fain be doing.

GREMIO:
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your
wooing. Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am
sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself,
that have been more kindly beholding to you than
any, freely give unto you this young scholar,
that hath been long studying at Rheims; as cunning
in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the other
in music and mathematics: his name is Cambio; pray,
accept his service.

BAPTISTA:
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio.
Welcome, good Cambio.
But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger:
may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?

TRANIO:
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That, being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo
And free access and favour as the rest:
And, toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great.

BAPTISTA:
Lucentio is your name; of whence, I pray?

TRANIO:
Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.

BAPTISTA:
A mighty man of Pisa; by report
I know him well: you are very welcome, sir,
Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters; and tell them both,
These are their tutors: bid them use them well.
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.

PETRUCHIO:
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have better'd rather than decreased:
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?

BAPTISTA:
After my death the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns.

PETRUCHIO:
And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever:
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.

BAPTISTA:
Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, that is nothing: for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury:
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her and so she yields to me;
For I am rough and woo not like a babe.

BAPTISTA:
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.

PETRUCHIO:
Ay, to the proof; as mountains are for winds,
That shake not, though they blow perpetually.

BAPTISTA:
How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale?

HORTENSIO:
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.

BAPTISTA:
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?

HORTENSIO:
I think she'll sooner prove a soldier
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.

BAPTISTA:
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?

HORTENSIO:
Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
'Frets, call you these?' quoth she; 'I'll fume
with them:'
And, with that word, she struck me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way;
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute;
While she did call me rascal fiddler
And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
I love her ten times more than e'er I did:
O, how I long to have some chat with her!

BAPTISTA:
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited:
Proceed in practise with my younger daughter;
She's apt to learn and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?

PETRUCHIO:
I pray you do.
I will attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail; why then I'll tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale:
Say that she frown, I'll say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly wash'd with dew:
Say she be mute and will not speak a word;
Then I'll commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, I'll give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, I'll crave the day
When I shall ask the banns and when be married.
But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak.
Good morrow, Kate; for that's your name, I hear.

KATHARINA:
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
They call me Katharina that do talk of me.

PETRUCHIO:
You lie, in faith; for you are call'd plain Kate,
And bonny Kate and sometimes Kate the curst;
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation;
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.

KATHARINA:
Moved! in good time: let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence: I knew you at the first
You were a moveable.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, what's a moveable?

KATHARINA:
A join'd-stool.

PETRUCHIO:
Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me.

KATHARINA:
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.

PETRUCHIO:
Women are made to bear, and so are you.

KATHARINA:
No such jade as you, if me you mean.

PETRUCHIO:
Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee;
For, knowing thee to be but young and light--

KATHARINA:
Too light for such a swain as you to catch;
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.

PETRUCHIO:
Should be! should--buzz!

KATHARINA:
Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.

PETRUCHIO:
O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee?

KATHARINA:
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, come, you wasp; i' faith, you are too angry.

KATHARINA:
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.

PETRUCHIO:
My remedy is then, to pluck it out.

KATHARINA:
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies,

PETRUCHIO:
Who knows not where a wasp does
wear his sting? In his tail.

KATHARINA:
In his tongue.

PETRUCHIO:
Whose tongue?

KATHARINA:
Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell.

PETRUCHIO:
What, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman.

KATHARINA:
That I'll try.

PETRUCHIO:
I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.

KATHARINA:
So may you lose your arms:
If you strike me, you are no gentleman;
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.

PETRUCHIO:
A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books!

KATHARINA:
What is your crest? a coxcomb?

PETRUCHIO:
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.

KATHARINA:
No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.

KATHARINA:
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, here's no crab; and therefore look not sour.

KATHARINA:
There is, there is.

PETRUCHIO:
Then show it me.

KATHARINA:
Had I a glass, I would.

PETRUCHIO:
What, you mean my face?

KATHARINA:
Well aim'd of such a young one.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.

KATHARINA:
Yet you are wither'd.

PETRUCHIO:
'Tis with cares.

KATHARINA:
I care not.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so.

KATHARINA:
I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go.

PETRUCHIO:
No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle.
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers:
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk,
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
Is straight and slender and as brown in hue
As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.
O, let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.

KATHARINA:
Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.

PETRUCHIO:
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate;
And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful!

KATHARINA:
Where did you study all this goodly speech?

PETRUCHIO:
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.

KATHARINA:
A witty mother! witless else her son.

PETRUCHIO:
Am I not wise?

KATHARINA:
Yes; keep you warm.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katharina, in thy bed:
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed on;
And, Will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn;
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty, that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me;
For I am he am born to tame you Kate,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father: never make denial;
I must and will have Katharina to my wife.

BAPTISTA:
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?

PETRUCHIO:
How but well, sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.

BAPTISTA:
Why, how now, daughter Katharina! in your dumps?

KATHARINA:
Call you me daughter? now, I promise you
You have show'd a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic;
A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.

PETRUCHIO:
Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the world,
That talk'd of her, have talk'd amiss of her:
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove;
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity:
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together,
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.

KATHARINA:
I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first.

GREMIO:
Hark, Petruchio; she says she'll see thee
hang'd first.

TRANIO:
Is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part!

PETRUCHIO:
Be patient, gentlemen; I choose her for myself:
If she and I be pleased, what's that to you?
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you, 'tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me: O, the kindest Kate!
She hung about my neck; and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see,
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice,
To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine.

BAPTISTA:
I know not what to say: but give me your hands;
God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match.

GREMIO:
Amen, say we: we will be witnesses.

PETRUCHIO:
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu;
I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace:
We will have rings and things and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married o'Sunday.

GREMIO:
Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly?

BAPTISTA:
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.

TRANIO:
'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you:
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.

BAPTISTA:
The gain I seek is, quiet in the match.

GREMIO:
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter:
Now is the day we long have looked for:
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.

TRANIO:
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.

GREMIO:
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.

TRANIO:
Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.

GREMIO:
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back: 'tis age that nourisheth.

TRANIO:
But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.

BAPTISTA:
Content you, gentlemen: I will compound this strife:
'Tis deeds must win the prize; and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Bianca's love.
Say, Signior Gremio, What can you assure her?

GREMIO:
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold;
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needlework,
Pewter and brass and all things that belong
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
Sixscore fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
And if I die to-morrow, this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.

TRANIO:
That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my father's heir and only son:
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
I'll leave her houses three or four as good,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio?

GREMIO:
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have; besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marseilles' road.
What, have I choked you with an argosy?

TRANIO:
Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies; besides two galliases,
And twelve tight galleys: these I will assure her,
And twice as much, whate'er thou offer'st next.

GREMIO:
Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more;
And she can have no more than all I have:
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.

TRANIO:
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied.

BAPTISTA:
I must confess your offer is the best;
And, let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own; else, you must pardon me,
if you should die before him, where's her dower?

TRANIO:
That's but a cavil: he is old, I young.

GREMIO:
And may not young men die, as well as old?

BAPTISTA:
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katharina is to be married:
Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you this assurance;
If not, Signior Gremio:
And so, I take my leave, and thank you both.

GREMIO:
Adieu, good neighbour.
Now I fear thee not:
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.

TRANIO:
A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide!
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
'Tis in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, call'd 'supposed Vincentio;'
And that's a wonder: fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing,
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.

LUCENTIO:
Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir:
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katharina welcomed you withal?

HORTENSIO:
But, wrangling pedant, this is
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have prerogative;
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.

LUCENTIO:
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordain'd!
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.

HORTENSIO:
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.

BIANCA:
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To strive for that which resteth in my choice:
I am no breeching scholar in the schools;
I'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles;
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.

HORTENSIO:
You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune?

LUCENTIO:
That will be never: tune your instrument.

BIANCA:
Where left we last?

LUCENTIO:
Here, madam:
'Hic ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.'

BIANCA:
Construe them.

LUCENTIO:
'Hic ibat,' as I told you before, 'Simois,' I am
Lucentio, 'hic est,' son unto Vincentio of Pisa,
'Sigeia tellus,' disguised thus to get your love;
'Hic steterat,' and that Lucentio that comes
a-wooing, 'Priami,' is my man Tranio, 'regia,'
bearing my port, 'celsa senis,' that we might
beguile the old pantaloon.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, my instrument's in tune.

BIANCA:
Let's hear. O fie! the treble jars.

LUCENTIO:
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.

BIANCA:
Now let me see if I can construe it: 'Hic ibat
Simois,' I know you not, 'hic est Sigeia tellus,' I
trust you not; 'Hic steterat Priami,' take heed
he hear us not, 'regia,' presume not, 'celsa senis,'
despair not.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, 'tis now in tune.

LUCENTIO:
All but the base.

HORTENSIO:
The base is right; 'tis the base knave that jars.
How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.

BIANCA:
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.

LUCENTIO:
Mistrust it not: for, sure, AEacides
Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.

BIANCA:
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt:
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you:
Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.

HORTENSIO:
You may go walk, and give me leave a while:
My lessons make no music in three parts.

LUCENTIO:
Are you so formal, sir? well, I must wait,
And watch withal; for, but I be deceived,
Our fine musician groweth amorous.

HORTENSIO:
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art;
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade:
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.

BIANCA:
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.

HORTENSIO:
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.

BIANCA:

Servant:
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
And help to dress your sister's chamber up:
You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.

BIANCA:
Farewell, sweet masters both; I must be gone.

LUCENTIO:
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.

HORTENSIO:
But I have cause to pry into this pedant:
Methinks he looks as though he were in love:
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.

BAPTISTA:

KATHARINA:
No shame but mine: I must, forsooth, be forced
To give my hand opposed against my heart
Unto a mad-brain rudesby full of spleen;
Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was a frantic fool,
Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior:
And, to be noted for a merry man,
He'll woo a thousand, 'point the day of marriage,
Make feasts, invite friends, and proclaim the banns;
Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd.
Now must the world point at poor Katharina,
And say, 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife,
If it would please him come and marry her!'

TRANIO:
Patience, good Katharina, and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well,
Whatever fortune stays him from his word:
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise;
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.

KATHARINA:
Would Katharina had never seen him though!

BAPTISTA:
Go, girl; I cannot blame thee now to weep;
For such an injury would vex a very saint,
Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

BIONDELLO:
Master, master! news, old news, and such news as
you never heard of!

BAPTISTA:
Is it new and old too? how may that be?

BIONDELLO:
Why, is it not news, to hear of Petruchio's coming?

BAPTISTA:
Is he come?

BIONDELLO:
Why, no, sir.

BAPTISTA:
What then?

BIONDELLO:
He is coming.

BAPTISTA:
When will he be here?

BIONDELLO:
When he stands where I am and sees you there.

TRANIO:
But say, what to thine old news?

BIONDELLO:
Why, Petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old
jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair
of boots that have been candle-cases, one buckled,
another laced, an old rusty sword ta'en out of the
town-armory, with a broken hilt, and chapeless;
with two broken points: his horse hipped with an
old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred;
besides, possessed with the glanders and like to mose
in the chine; troubled with the lampass, infected
with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with
spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives,
stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the
bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten;
near-legged before and with, a half-chequed bit
and a head-stall of sheeps leather which, being
restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been
often burst and now repaired with knots; one girth
six time pieced and a woman's crupper of velure,
which hath two letters for her name fairly set down
in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.

BAPTISTA:
Who comes with him?

BIONDELLO:
O, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned
like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a
kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red
and blue list; an old hat and 'the humour of forty
fancies' pricked in't for a feather: a monster, a
very monster in apparel, and not like a Christian
footboy or a gentleman's lackey.

TRANIO:
'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion;
Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd.

BAPTISTA:
I am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.

BIONDELLO:
Why, sir, he comes not.

BAPTISTA:
Didst thou not say he comes?

BIONDELLO:
Who? that Petruchio came?

BAPTISTA:
Ay, that Petruchio came.

BIONDELLO:
No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.

BAPTISTA:
Why, that's all one.

BIONDELLO:
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
A horse and a man
Is more than one,
And yet not many.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, where be these gallants? who's at home?

BAPTISTA:
You are welcome, sir.

PETRUCHIO:
And yet I come not well.

BAPTISTA:
And yet you halt not.

TRANIO:
Not so well apparell'd
As I wish you were.

PETRUCHIO:
Were it better, I should rush in thus.
But where is Kate? where is my lovely bride?
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you frown:
And wherefore gaze this goodly company,
As if they saw some wondrous monument,
Some comet or unusual prodigy?

BAPTISTA:
Why, sir, you know this is your wedding-day:
First were we sad, fearing you would not come;
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate,
An eye-sore to our solemn festival!

TRANIO:
And tells us, what occasion of import
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife,
And sent you hither so unlike yourself?

PETRUCHIO:
Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear:
Sufficeth I am come to keep my word,
Though in some part enforced to digress;
Which, at more leisure, I will so excuse
As you shall well be satisfied withal.
But where is Kate? I stay too long from her:
The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.

TRANIO:
See not your bride in these unreverent robes:
Go to my chamber; Put on clothes of mine.

PETRUCHIO:
Not I, believe me: thus I'll visit her.

BAPTISTA:
But thus, I trust, you will not marry her.

PETRUCHIO:
Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done with words:
To me she's married, not unto my clothes:
Could I repair what she will wear in me,
As I can change these poor accoutrements,
'Twere well for Kate and better for myself.
But what a fool am I to chat with you,
When I should bid good morrow to my bride,
And seal the title with a lovely kiss!

TRANIO:
He hath some meaning in his mad attire:
We will persuade him, be it possible,
To put on better ere he go to church.

BAPTISTA:
I'll after him, and see the event of this.

TRANIO:
But to her love concerneth us to add
Her father's liking: which to bring to pass,
As I before unparted to your worship,
I am to get a man,--whate'er he be,
It skills not much. we'll fit him to our turn,--
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa;
And make assurance here in Padua
Of greater sums than I have promised.
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope,
And marry sweet Bianca with consent.

LUCENTIO:
Were it not that my fellow-school-master
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly,
'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage;
Which once perform'd, let all the world say no,
I'll keep mine own, despite of all the world.

TRANIO:
That by degrees we mean to look into,
And watch our vantage in this business:
We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio,
The narrow-prying father, Minola,
The quaint musician, amorous Licio;
All for my master's sake, Lucentio.
Signior Gremio, came you from the church?

GREMIO:
As willingly as e'er I came from school.

TRANIO:
And is the bride and bridegroom coming home?

GREMIO:
A bridegroom say you? 'tis a groom indeed,
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.

TRANIO:
Curster than she? why, 'tis impossible.

GREMIO:
Why he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.

TRANIO:
Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.

GREMIO:
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him!
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest
Should ask, if Katharina should be his wife,
'Ay, by gogs-wouns,' quoth he; and swore so loud,
That, all-amazed, the priest let fall the book;
And, as he stoop'd again to take it up,
The mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff
That down fell priest and book and book and priest:
'Now take them up,' quoth he, 'if any list.'

TRANIO:
What said the wench when he rose again?

GREMIO:
Trembled and shook; for why, he stamp'd and swore,
As if the vicar meant to cozen him.
But after many ceremonies done,
He calls for wine: 'A health!' quoth he, as if
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates
After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face;
Having no other reason
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly
And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking.
This done, he took the bride about the neck
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack
That at the parting all the church did echo:
And I seeing this came thence for very shame;
And after me, I know, the rout is coming.
Such a mad marriage never was before:
Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.

PETRUCHIO:
Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your pains:
I know you think to dine with me to-day,
And have prepared great store of wedding cheer;
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence,
And therefore here I mean to take my leave.

BAPTISTA:
Is't possible you will away to-night?

PETRUCHIO:
I must away to-day, before night come:
Make it no wonder; if you knew my business,
You would entreat me rather go than stay.
And, honest company, I thank you all,
That have beheld me give away myself
To this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife:
Dine with my father, drink a health to me;
For I must hence; and farewell to you all.

TRANIO:
Let us entreat you stay till after dinner.

PETRUCHIO:
It may not be.

GREMIO:
Let me entreat you.

PETRUCHIO:
It cannot be.

KATHARINA:
Let me entreat you.

PETRUCHIO:
I am content.

KATHARINA:
Are you content to stay?

PETRUCHIO:
I am content you shall entreat me stay;
But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.

KATHARINA:
Now, if you love me, stay.

PETRUCHIO:
Grumio, my horse.

GRUMIO:
Ay, sir, they be ready: the oats have eaten the horses.

KATHARINA:
Nay, then,
Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day;
No, nor to-morrow, not till I please myself.
The door is open, sir; there lies your way;
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green;
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself:
'Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom,
That take it on you at the first so roundly.

PETRUCHIO:
O Kate, content thee; prithee, be not angry.

KATHARINA:
I will be angry: what hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure.

GREMIO:
Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.

KATARINA:
Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner:
I see a woman may be made a fool,
If she had not a spirit to resist.

PETRUCHIO:
They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you that attend on her;
Go to the feast, revel and domineer,
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead,
Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves:
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
I will be master of what is mine own:
She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
My household stuff, my field, my barn,
My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing;
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare;
I'll bring mine action on the proudest he
That stops my way in Padua. Grumio,
Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves;
Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch
thee, Kate:
I'll buckler thee against a million.

BAPTISTA:
Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.

GREMIO:
Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.

TRANIO:
Of all mad matches never was the like.

LUCENTIO:
Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?

BIANCA:
That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.

GREMIO:
I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated.

BAPTISTA:
Neighbours and friends, though bride and
bridegroom wants
For to supply the places at the table,
You know there wants no junkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place:
And let Bianca take her sister's room.

TRANIO:
Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it?

BAPTISTA:
She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's go.

GRUMIO:
Fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and
all foul ways! Was ever man so beaten? was ever
man so rayed? was ever man so weary? I am sent
before to make a fire, and they are coming after to
warm them. Now, were not I a little pot and soon
hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my
tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my
belly, ere I should come by a fire to thaw me: but
I, with blowing the fire, shall warm myself; for,
considering the weather, a taller man than I will
take cold. Holla, ho! Curtis.

CURTIS:
Who is that calls so coldly?

GRUMIO:
A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide
from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run
but my head and my neck. A fire good Curtis.

CURTIS:
Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio?

GRUMIO:
O, ay, Curtis, ay: and therefore fire, fire; cast
on no water.

CURTIS:
Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?

GRUMIO:
She was, good Curtis, before this frost: but, thou
knowest, winter tames man, woman and beast; for it
hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and
myself, fellow Curtis.

CURTIS:
Away, you three-inch fool! I am no beast.

GRUMIO:
Am I but three inches? why, thy horn is a foot; and
so long am I at the least. But wilt thou make a
fire, or shall I complain on thee to our mistress,
whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon
feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?

CURTIS:
I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how goes the world?

GRUMIO:
A cold world, Curtis, in every office but thine; and
therefore fire: do thy duty, and have thy duty; for
my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.

CURTIS:
There's fire ready; and therefore, good Grumio, the news.

GRUMIO:
Why, 'Jack, boy! ho! boy!' and as much news as
will thaw.

CURTIS:
Come, you are so full of cony-catching!

GRUMIO:
Why, therefore fire; for I have caught extreme cold.
Where's the cook? is supper ready, the house
trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept; the
serving-men in their new fustian, their white
stockings, and every officer his wedding-garment on?
Be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without,
the carpets laid, and every thing in order?

CURTIS:
All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, news.

GRUMIO:
First, know, my horse is tired; my master and
mistress fallen out.

CURTIS:
How?

GRUMIO:
Out of their saddles into the dirt; and thereby
hangs a tale.

CURTIS:
Let's ha't, good Grumio.

GRUMIO:
Lend thine ear.

CURTIS:
Here.

GRUMIO:
There.

CURTIS:
This is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.

GRUMIO:
And therefore 'tis called a sensible tale: and this
cuff was but to knock at your ear, and beseech
listening. Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a
foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress,--

CURTIS:
Both of one horse?

GRUMIO:
What's that to thee?

CURTIS:
Why, a horse.

GRUMIO:
Tell thou the tale: but hadst thou not crossed me,
thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she
under her horse; thou shouldst have heard in how
miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her
with the horse upon her, how he beat me because
her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt
to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed,
that never prayed before, how I cried, how the
horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how I
lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory,
which now shall die in oblivion and thou return
unexperienced to thy grave.

CURTIS:
By this reckoning he is more shrew than she.

GRUMIO:
Ay; and that thou and the proudest of you all shall
find when he comes home. But what talk I of this?
Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, Nicholas, Philip,
Walter, Sugarsop and the rest: let their heads be
sleekly combed their blue coats brushed and their
garters of an indifferent knit: let them curtsy
with their left legs and not presume to touch a hair
of my master's horse-tail till they kiss their
hands. Are they all ready?

CURTIS:
They are.

GRUMIO:
Call them forth.

CURTIS:
Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to
countenance my mistress.

GRUMIO:
Why, she hath a face of her own.

CURTIS:
Who knows not that?

GRUMIO:
Thou, it seems, that calls for company to
countenance her.

CURTIS:
I call them forth to credit her.

GRUMIO:
Why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.

NATHANIEL:
Welcome home, Grumio!

PHILIP:
How now, Grumio!

JOSEPH:
What, Grumio!

NICHOLAS:
Fellow Grumio!

NATHANIEL:
How now, old lad?

GRUMIO:
Welcome, you;--how now, you;-- what, you;--fellow,
you;--and thus much for greeting. Now, my spruce
companions, is all ready, and all things neat?

NATHANIEL:
All things is ready. How near is our master?

GRUMIO:
E'en at hand, alighted by this; and therefore be
not--Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.

PETRUCHIO:
Where be these knaves? What, no man at door
To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse!
Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip?

ALL SERVING-MEN:
Here, here, sir; here, sir.

PETRUCHIO:
Here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!
You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms!
What, no attendance? no regard? no duty?
Where is the foolish knave I sent before?

GRUMIO:
Here, sir; as foolish as I was before.

PETRUCHIO:
You peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park,
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee?

GRUMIO:
Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made,
And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' the heel;
There was no link to colour Peter's hat,
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing:
There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory;
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly;
Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.

PETRUCHIO:
Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
Where is the life that late I led--
Where are those--Sit down, Kate, and welcome.--
Sound, sound, sound, sound!
Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.
Off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?
It was the friar of orders grey,
As he forth walked on his way:--
Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry:
Take that, and mend the plucking off the other.
Be merry, Kate. Some water, here; what, ho!
Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence,
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither:
One, Kate, that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.
Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water?
Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.
You whoreson villain! will you let it fall?

KATHARINA:
Patience, I pray you; 'twas a fault unwilling.

PETRUCHIO:
A whoreson beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave!
Come, Kate, sit down; I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate; or else shall I?
What's this? mutton?

First Servant:
Ay.

PETRUCHIO:
Who brought it?

PETER:
I.

PETRUCHIO:
'Tis burnt; and so is all the meat.
What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser,
And serve it thus to me that love it not?
Theretake it to you, trenchers, cups, and all;
You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves!
What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.

KATHARINA:
I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet:
The meat was well, if you were so contented.

PETRUCHIO:
I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away;
And I expressly am forbid to touch it,
For it engenders choler, planteth anger;
And better 'twere that both of us did fast,
Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric,
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh.
Be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended,
And, for this night, we'll fast for company:
Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.

NATHANIEL:
Peter, didst ever see the like?

PETER:
He kills her in her own humour.

GRUMIO:
Where is he?

CURTIS:
In her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her;
And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul,
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak,
And sits as one new-risen from a dream.
Away, away! for he is coming hither.

PETRUCHIO:
Thus have I politicly begun my reign,
And 'tis my hope to end successfully.
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty;
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged,
For then she never looks upon her lure.
Another way I have to man my haggard,
To make her come and know her keeper's call,
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites
That bate and beat and will not be obedient.
She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat;
Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not;
As with the meat, some undeserved fault
I'll find about the making of the bed;
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster,
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets:
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend
That all is done in reverend care of her;
And in conclusion she shall watch all night:
And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl
And with the clamour keep her still awake.
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness;
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.
He that knows better how to tame a shrew,
Now let him speak: 'tis charity to show.

TRANIO:
Is't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca
Doth fancy any other but Lucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.

HORTENSIO:
Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said,
Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.

LUCENTIO:
Now, mistress, profit you in what you read?

BIANCA:
What, master, read you? first resolve me that.

LUCENTIO:
I read that I profess, the Art to Love.

BIANCA:
And may you prove, sir, master of your art!

LUCENTIO:
While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!

HORTENSIO:
Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I pray,
You that durst swear at your mistress Bianca
Loved none in the world so well as Lucentio.

TRANIO:
O despiteful love! unconstant womankind!
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.

HORTENSIO:
Mistake no more: I am not Licio,
Nor a musician, as I seem to be;
But one that scorn to live in this disguise,
For such a one as leaves a gentleman,
And makes a god of such a cullion:
Know, sir, that I am call'd Hortensio.

TRANIO:
Signior Hortensio, I have often heard
Of your entire affection to Bianca;
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness,
I will with you, if you be so contented,
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever.

HORTENSIO:
See, how they kiss and court! Signior Lucentio,
Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow
Never to woo her no more, but do forswear her,
As one unworthy all the former favours
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal.

TRANIO:
And here I take the unfeigned oath,
Never to marry with her though she would entreat:
Fie on her! see, how beastly she doth court him!

HORTENSIO:
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn!
For me, that I may surely keep mine oath,
I will be married to a wealthy widow,
Ere three days pass, which hath as long loved me
As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard.
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio.
Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks,
Shall win my love: and so I take my leave,
In resolution as I swore before.

TRANIO:
Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace
As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case!
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love,
And have forsworn you with Hortensio.

BIANCA:
Tranio, you jest: but have you both forsworn me?

TRANIO:
Mistress, we have.

LUCENTIO:
Then we are rid of Licio.

TRANIO:
I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now,
That shall be wood and wedded in a day.

BIANCA:
God give him joy!

TRANIO:
Ay, and he'll tame her.

BIANCA:
He says so, Tranio.

TRANIO:
Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school.

BIANCA:
The taming-school! what, is there such a place?

TRANIO:
Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master;
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long,
To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

BIONDELLO:
O master, master, I have watch'd so long
That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied
An ancient angel coming down the hill,
Will serve the turn.

TRANIO:
What is he, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
Master, a mercatante, or a pedant,
I know not what; but format in apparel,
In gait and countenance surely like a father.

LUCENTIO:
And what of him, Tranio?

TRANIO:
If he be credulous and trust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio,
And give assurance to Baptista Minola,
As if he were the right Vincentio
Take in your love, and then let me alone.

Pedant:
God save you, sir!

TRANIO:
And you, sir! you are welcome.
Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?

Pedant:
Sir, at the farthest for a week or two:
But then up farther, and as for as Rome;
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.

TRANIO:
What countryman, I pray?

Pedant:
Of Mantua.

TRANIO:
Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid!
And come to Padua, careless of your life?

Pedant:
My life, sir! how, I pray? for that goes hard.

TRANIO:
'Tis death for any one in Mantua
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause?
Your ships are stay'd at Venice, and the duke,
For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him,
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly:
'Tis, marvel, but that you are but newly come,
You might have heard it else proclaim'd about.

Pedant:
Alas! sir, it is worse for me than so;
For I have bills for money by exchange
From Florence and must here deliver them.

TRANIO:
Well, sir, to do you courtesy,
This will I do, and this I will advise you:
First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa?

Pedant:
Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been,
Pisa renowned for grave citizens.

TRANIO:
Among them know you one Vincentio?

Pedant:
I know him not, but I have heard of him;
A merchant of incomparable wealth.

TRANIO:
He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say,
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.

BIONDELLO:

TRANIO:
To save your life in this extremity,
This favour will I do you for his sake;
And think it not the worst of an your fortunes
That you are like to Sir Vincentio.
His name and credit shall you undertake,
And in my house you shall be friendly lodged:
Look that you take upon you as you should;
You understand me, sir: so shall you stay
Till you have done your business in the city:
If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it.

Pedant:
O sir, I do; and will repute you ever
The patron of my life and liberty.

TRANIO:
Then go with me to make the matter good.
This, by the way, I let you understand;
my father is here look'd for every day,
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here:
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you:
Go with me to clothe you as becomes you.

GRUMIO:
No, no, forsooth; I dare not for my life.

KATHARINA:
The more my wrong, the more his spite appears:
What, did he marry me to famish me?
Beggars, that come unto my father's door,
Upon entreaty have a present aims;
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity:
But I, who never knew how to entreat,
Nor never needed that I should entreat,
Am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep,
With oath kept waking and with brawling fed:
And that which spites me more than all these wants,
He does it under name of perfect love;
As who should say, if I should sleep or eat,
'Twere deadly sickness or else present death.
I prithee go and get me some repast;
I care not what, so it be wholesome food.

GRUMIO:
What say you to a neat's foot?

KATHARINA:
'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it.

GRUMIO:
I fear it is too choleric a meat.
How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd?

KATHARINA:
I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me.

GRUMIO:
I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric.
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard?

KATHARINA:
A dish that I do love to feed upon.

GRUMIO:
Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.

KATHARINA:
Why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.

GRUMIO:
Nay then, I will not: you shall have the mustard,
Or else you get no beef of Grumio.

KATHARINA:
Then both, or one, or any thing thou wilt.

GRUMIO:
Why then, the mustard without the beef.

KATHARINA:
Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave,
That feed'st me with the very name of meat:
Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you,
That triumph thus upon my misery!
Go, get thee gone, I say.

PETRUCHIO:
How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort?

HORTENSIO:
Mistress, what cheer?

KATHARINA:
Faith, as cold as can be.

PETRUCHIO:
Pluck up thy spirits; look cheerfully upon me.
Here love; thou see'st how diligent I am
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee:
I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.
What, not a word? Nay, then thou lovest it not;
And all my pains is sorted to no proof.
Here, take away this dish.

KATHARINA:
I pray you, let it stand.

PETRUCHIO:
The poorest service is repaid with thanks;
And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.

KATHARINA:
I thank you, sir.

HORTENSIO:
Signior Petruchio, fie! you are to blame.
Come, mistress Kate, I'll bear you company.

PETRUCHIO:

Haberdasher:
Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, this was moulded on a porringer;
A velvet dish: fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy:
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell,
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap:
Away with it! come, let me have a bigger.

KATHARINA:
I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time,
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these

PETRUCHIO:
When you are gentle, you shall have one too,
And not till then.

HORTENSIO:

KATHARINA:
Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak;
And speak I will; I am no child, no babe:
Your betters have endured me say my mind,
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.
My tongue will tell the anger of my heart,
Or else my heart concealing it will break,
And rather than it shall, I will be free
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, thou say'st true; it is a paltry cap,
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie:
I love thee well, in that thou likest it not.

KATHARINA:
Love me or love me not, I like the cap;
And it I will have, or I will have none.

PETRUCHIO:
Thy gown? why, ay: come, tailor, let us see't.
O mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here?
What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like a demi-cannon:
What, up and down, carved like an apple-tart?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash,
Like to a censer in a barber's shop:
Why, what, i' devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?

HORTENSIO:

Tailor:
You bid me make it orderly and well,
According to the fashion and the time.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, and did; but if you be remember'd,
I did not bid you mar it to the time.
Go, hop me over every kennel home,
For you shall hop without my custom, sir:
I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it.

KATHARINA:
I never saw a better-fashion'd gown,
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable:
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, true; he means to make a puppet of thee.

Tailor:
She says your worship means to make
a puppet of her.

PETRUCHIO:
O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou thread,
thou thimble,
Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail!
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou!
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant;
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou livest!
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown.

Tailor:
Your worship is deceived; the gown is made
Just as my master had direction:
Grumio gave order how it should be done.

GRUMIO:
I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff.

Tailor:
But how did you desire it should be made?

GRUMIO:
Marry, sir, with needle and thread.

Tailor:
But did you not request to have it cut?

GRUMIO:
Thou hast faced many things.

Tailor:
I have.

GRUMIO:
Face not me: thou hast braved many men; brave not
me; I will neither be faced nor braved. I say unto
thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown; but I did
not bid him cut it to pieces: ergo, thou liest.

Tailor:
Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify

PETRUCHIO:
Read it.

GRUMIO:
The note lies in's throat, if he say I said so.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in
the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom
of brown thread: I said a gown.

PETRUCHIO:
Proceed.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
I confess the cape.

Tailor:

GRUMIO:
I confess two sleeves.

Tailor:

PETRUCHIO:
Ay, there's the villany.

GRUMIO:
Error i' the bill, sir; error i' the bill.
I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and
sewed up again; and that I'll prove upon thee,
though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.

Tailor:
This is true that I say: an I had thee
in place where, thou shouldst know it.

GRUMIO:
I am for thee straight: take thou the
bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.

HORTENSIO:
God-a-mercy, Grumio! then he shall have no odds.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.

GRUMIO:
You are i' the right, sir: 'tis for my mistress.

PETRUCHIO:
Go, take it up unto thy master's use.

GRUMIO:
Villain, not for thy life: take up my mistress'
gown for thy master's use!

PETRUCHIO:
Why, sir, what's your conceit in that?

GRUMIO:
O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for:
Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use!
O, fie, fie, fie!

PETRUCHIO:

HORTENSIO:
Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow:
Take no unkindness of his hasty words:
Away! I say; commend me to thy master.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your father's
Even in these honest mean habiliments:
Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor;
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich;
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds,
So honour peereth in the meanest habit.
What is the jay more precious than the lark,
Because his fathers are more beautiful?
Or is the adder better than the eel,
Because his painted skin contents the eye?
O, no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse
For this poor furniture and mean array.
if thou account'st it shame. lay it on me;
And therefore frolic: we will hence forthwith,
To feast and sport us at thy father's house.
Go, call my men, and let us straight to him;
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end;
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot
Let's see; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
And well we may come there by dinner-time.

KATHARINA:
I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two;
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.

PETRUCHIO:
It shall be seven ere I go to horse:
Look, what I speak, or do, or think to do,
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let't alone:
I will not go to-day; and ere I do,
It shall be what o'clock I say it is.

HORTENSIO:

TRANIO:
Sir, this is the house: please it you that I call?

Pedant:
Ay, what else? and but I be deceived
Signior Baptista may remember me,
Near twenty years ago, in Genoa,
Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.

TRANIO:
'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case,
With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.

Pedant:
I warrant you.
But, sir, here comes your boy;
'Twere good he were school'd.

TRANIO:
Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello,
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you:
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.

BIONDELLO:
Tut, fear not me.

TRANIO:
But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista?

BIONDELLO:
I told him that your father was at Venice,
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.

TRANIO:
Thou'rt a tall fellow: hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista: set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you are happily met.
Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of:
I pray you stand good father to me now,
Give me Bianca for my patrimony.

Pedant:
Soft son!
Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua
To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause
Of love between your daughter and himself:
And, for the good report I hear of you
And for the love he beareth to your daughter
And she to him, to stay him not too long,
I am content, in a good father's care,
To have him match'd; and if you please to like
No worse than I, upon some agreement
Me shall you find ready and willing
With one consent to have her so bestow'd;
For curious I cannot be with you,
Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well.

BAPTISTA:
Sir, pardon me in what I have to say:
Your plainness and your shortness please me well.
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here
Doth love my daughter and she loveth him,
Or both dissemble deeply their affections:
And therefore, if you say no more than this,
That like a father you will deal with him
And pass my daughter a sufficient dower,
The match is made, and all is done:
Your son shall have my daughter with consent.

TRANIO:
I thank you, sir. Where then do you know best
We be affied and such assurance ta'en
As shall with either part's agreement stand?

BAPTISTA:
Not in my house, Lucentio; for, you know,
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants:
Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still;
And happily we might be interrupted.

TRANIO:
Then at my lodging, an it like you:
There doth my father lie; and there, this night,
We'll pass the business privately and well.
Send for your daughter by your servant here:
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.
The worst is this, that, at so slender warning,
You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.

BAPTISTA:
It likes me well. Biondello, hie you home,
And bid Bianca make her ready straight;
And, if you will, tell what hath happened,
Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua,
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.

BIONDELLO:
I pray the gods she may with all my heart!

TRANIO:
Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way?
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer:
Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa.

BAPTISTA:
I follow you.

BIONDELLO:
Cambio!

LUCENTIO:
What sayest thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you?

LUCENTIO:
Biondello, what of that?

BIONDELLO:
Faith, nothing; but has left me here behind, to
expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.

LUCENTIO:
I pray thee, moralize them.

BIONDELLO:
Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking with the
deceiving father of a deceitful son.

LUCENTIO:
And what of him?

BIONDELLO:
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.

LUCENTIO:
And then?

BIONDELLO:
The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your
command at all hours.

LUCENTIO:
And what of all this?

BIONDELLO:
I cannot tell; expect they are busied about a
counterfeit assurance: take you assurance of her,
'cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum:' to the
church; take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient
honest witnesses: If this be not that you look for,
I have no more to say, But bid Bianca farewell for
ever and a day.

LUCENTIO:
Hearest thou, Biondello?

BIONDELLO:
I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an
afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to
stuff a rabbit; and so may you, sir: and so, adieu,
sir. My master hath appointed me to go to Saint
Luke's, to bid the priest be ready to come against
you come with your appendix.

LUCENTIO:
I may, and will, if she be so contented:
She will be pleased; then wherefore should I doubt?
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her:
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.

PETRUCHIO:
Come on, i' God's name; once more toward our father's.
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!

KATHARINA:
The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now.

PETRUCHIO:
I say it is the moon that shines so bright.

KATHARINA:
I know it is the sun that shines so bright.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself,
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list,
Or ere I journey to your father's house.
Go on, and fetch our horses back again.
Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd!

HORTENSIO:
Say as he says, or we shall never go.

KATHARINA:
Forward, I pray, since we have come so far,
And be it moon, or sun, or what you please:
An if you please to call it a rush-candle,
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.

PETRUCHIO:
I say it is the moon.

KATHARINA:
I know it is the moon.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, then you lie: it is the blessed sun.

KATHARINA:
Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun:
But sun it is not, when you say it is not;
And the moon changes even as your mind.
What you will have it named, even that it is;
And so it shall be so for Katharina.

HORTENSIO:
Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run,
And not unluckily against the bias.
But, soft! company is coming here.
Good morrow, gentle mistress: where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too,
Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman?
Such war of white and red within her cheeks!
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty,
As those two eyes become that heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.

HORTENSIO:
A' will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.

KATHARINA:
Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet,
Whither away, or where is thy abode?
Happy the parents of so fair a child;
Happier the man, whom favourable stars
Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow!

PETRUCHIO:
Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not mad:
This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, wither'd,
And not a maiden, as thou say'st he is.

KATHARINA:
Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes,
That have been so bedazzled with the sun
That everything I look on seemeth green:
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father;
Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking.

PETRUCHIO:
Do, good old grandsire; and withal make known
Which way thou travellest: if along with us,
We shall be joyful of thy company.

VINCENTIO:
Fair sir, and you my merry mistress,
That with your strange encounter much amazed me,
My name is call'd Vincentio; my dwelling Pisa;
And bound I am to Padua; there to visit
A son of mine, which long I have not seen.

PETRUCHIO:
What is his name?

VINCENTIO:
Lucentio, gentle sir.

PETRUCHIO:
Happily we met; the happier for thy son.
And now by law, as well as reverend age,
I may entitle thee my loving father:
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman,
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not,
Nor be grieved: she is of good esteem,
Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth;
Beside, so qualified as may beseem
The spouse of any noble gentleman.
Let me embrace with old Vincentio,
And wander we to see thy honest son,
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.

VINCENTIO:
But is it true? or else is it your pleasure,
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest
Upon the company you overtake?

HORTENSIO:
I do assure thee, father, so it is.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, go along, and see the truth hereof;
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.

HORTENSIO:
Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart.
Have to my widow! and if she be froward,
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.

BIONDELLO:
Softly and swiftly, sir; for the priest is ready.

LUCENTIO:
I fly, Biondello: but they may chance to need thee
at home; therefore leave us.

BIONDELLO:
Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back; and
then come back to my master's as soon as I can.

GREMIO:
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while.

PETRUCHIO:
Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house:
My father's bears more toward the market-place;
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.

VINCENTIO:
You shall not choose but drink before you go:
I think I shall command your welcome here,
And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.

GREMIO:
They're busy within; you were best knock louder.

Pedant:
What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?

VINCENTIO:
Is Signior Lucentio within, sir?

Pedant:
He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.

VINCENTIO:
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two, to
make merry withal?

Pedant:
Keep your hundred pounds to yourself: he shall
need none, so long as I live.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.
Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances,
I pray you, tell Signior Lucentio that his father is
come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.

Pedant:
Thou liest: his father is come from Padua and here
looking out at the window.

VINCENTIO:
Art thou his father?

Pedant:
Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may believe her.

PETRUCHIO:

Pedant:
Lay hands on the villain: I believe a' means to
cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.

BIONDELLO:
I have seen them in the church together: God send
'em good shipping! But who is here? mine old
master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.

VINCENTIO:

BIONDELLO:
Hope I may choose, sir.

VINCENTIO:
Come hither, you rogue. What, have you forgot me?

BIONDELLO:
Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I
never saw you before in all my life.

VINCENTIO:
What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see
thy master's father, Vincentio?

BIONDELLO:
What, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir:
see where he looks out of the window.

VINCENTIO:
Is't so, indeed.

BIONDELLO:
Help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.

Pedant:
Help, son! help, Signior Baptista!

PETRUCHIO:
Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of
this controversy.

TRANIO:
Sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?

VINCENTIO:
What am I, sir! nay, what are you, sir? O immortal
gods! O fine villain! A silken doublet! a velvet
hose! a scarlet cloak! and a copatain hat! O, I
am undone! I am undone! while I play the good
husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at
the university.

TRANIO:
How now! what's the matter?

BAPTISTA:
What, is the man lunatic?

TRANIO:
Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your
habit, but your words show you a madman. Why, sir,
what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I
thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.

VINCENTIO:
Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.

BAPTISTA:
You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, what do
you think is his name?

VINCENTIO:
His name! as if I knew not his name: I have brought
him up ever since he was three years old, and his
name is Tranio.

Pedant:
Away, away, mad ass! his name is Lucentio and he is
mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.

VINCENTIO:
Lucentio! O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold
on him, I charge you, in the duke's name. O, my
son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio?

TRANIO:
Call forth an officer.
Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Baptista,
I charge you see that he be forthcoming.

VINCENTIO:
Carry me to the gaol!

GREMIO:
Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison.

BAPTISTA:
Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.

GREMIO:
Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be
cony-catched in this business: I dare swear this
is the right Vincentio.

Pedant:
Swear, if thou darest.

GREMIO:
Nay, I dare not swear it.

TRANIO:
Then thou wert best say that I am not Lucentio.

GREMIO:
Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio.

BAPTISTA:
Away with the dotard! to the gaol with him!

VINCENTIO:
Thus strangers may be hailed and abused: O
monstrous villain!

BIONDELLO:
O! we are spoiled and--yonder he is: deny him,
forswear him, or else we are all undone.

LUCENTIO:

VINCENTIO:
Lives my sweet son?

BIANCA:
Pardon, dear father.

BAPTISTA:
How hast thou offended?
Where is Lucentio?

LUCENTIO:
Here's Lucentio,
Right son to the right Vincentio;
That have by marriage made thy daughter mine,
While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.

GREMIO:
Here's packing, with a witness to deceive us all!

VINCENTIO:
Where is that damned villain Tranio,
That faced and braved me in this matter so?

BAPTISTA:
Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio?

BIANCA:
Cambio is changed into Lucentio.

LUCENTIO:
Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love
Made me exchange my state with Tranio,
While he did bear my countenance in the town;
And happily I have arrived at the last
Unto the wished haven of my bliss.
What Tranio did, myself enforced him to;
Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.

VINCENTIO:
I'll slit the villain's nose, that would have sent
me to the gaol.

BAPTISTA:
But do you hear, sir? have you married my daughter
without asking my good will?

VINCENTIO:
Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, go to: but
I will in, to be revenged for this villany.

BAPTISTA:
And I, to sound the depth of this knavery.

LUCENTIO:
Look not pale, Bianca; thy father will not frown.

GREMIO:
My cake is dough; but I'll in among the rest,
Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.

KATHARINA:
Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.

PETRUCHIO:
First kiss me, Kate, and we will.

KATHARINA:
What, in the midst of the street?

PETRUCHIO:
What, art thou ashamed of me?

KATHARINA:
No, sir, God forbid; but ashamed to kiss.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, then let's home again. Come, sirrah, let's away.

KATHARINA:
Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.

PETRUCHIO:
Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate:
Better once than never, for never too late.

LUCENTIO:
At last, though long, our jarring notes agree:
And time it is, when raging war is done,
To smile at scapes and perils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome,
While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sister Katharina,
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow,
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house:
My banquet is to close our stomachs up,
After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down;
For now we sit to chat as well as eat.

PETRUCHIO:
Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!

BAPTISTA:
Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.

PETRUCHIO:
Padua affords nothing but what is kind.

HORTENSIO:
For both our sakes, I would that word were true.

PETRUCHIO:
Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his widow.

Widow:
Then never trust me, if I be afeard.

PETRUCHIO:
You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense:
I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.

Widow:
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round.

PETRUCHIO:
Roundly replied.

KATHARINA:
Mistress, how mean you that?

Widow:
Thus I conceive by him.

PETRUCHIO:
Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that?

HORTENSIO:
My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.

PETRUCHIO:
Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good widow.

KATHARINA:
'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:'
I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.

Widow:
Your husband, being troubled with a shrew,
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe:
And now you know my meaning,

KATHARINA:
A very mean meaning.

Widow:
Right, I mean you.

KATHARINA:
And I am mean indeed, respecting you.

PETRUCHIO:
To her, Kate!

HORTENSIO:
To her, widow!

PETRUCHIO:
A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.

HORTENSIO:
That's my office.

PETRUCHIO:
Spoke like an officer; ha' to thee, lad!

BAPTISTA:
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks?

GREMIO:
Believe me, sir, they butt together well.

BIANCA:
Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body
Would say your head and butt were head and horn.

VINCENTIO:
Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you?

BIANCA:
Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep again.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, that you shall not: since you have begun,
Have at you for a bitter jest or two!

BIANCA:
Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush;
And then pursue me as you draw your bow.
You are welcome all.

PETRUCHIO:
She hath prevented me. Here, Signior Tranio.
This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not;
Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.

TRANIO:
O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound,
Which runs himself and catches for his master.

PETRUCHIO:
A good swift simile, but something currish.

TRANIO:
'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself:
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.

BAPTISTA:
O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now.

LUCENTIO:
I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio.

HORTENSIO:
Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?

PETRUCHIO:
A' has a little gall'd me, I confess;
And, as the jest did glance away from me,
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.

BAPTISTA:
Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio,
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.

PETRUCHIO:
Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance
Let's each one send unto his wife;
And he whose wife is most obedient
To come at first when he doth send for her,
Shall win the wager which we will propose.

HORTENSIO:
Content. What is the wager?

LUCENTIO:
Twenty crowns.

PETRUCHIO:
Twenty crowns!
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
But twenty times so much upon my wife.

LUCENTIO:
A hundred then.

HORTENSIO:
Content.

PETRUCHIO:
A match! 'tis done.

HORTENSIO:
Who shall begin?

LUCENTIO:
That will I.
Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me.

BIONDELLO:
I go.

BAPTISTA:
Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes.

LUCENTIO:
I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself.
How now! what news?

BIONDELLO:
Sir, my mistress sends you word
That she is busy and she cannot come.

PETRUCHIO:
How! she is busy and she cannot come!
Is that an answer?

GREMIO:
Ay, and a kind one too:
Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.

PETRUCHIO:
I hope better.

HORTENSIO:
Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife
To come to me forthwith.

PETRUCHIO:
O, ho! entreat her!
Nay, then she must needs come.

HORTENSIO:
I am afraid, sir,
Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
Now, where's my wife?

BIONDELLO:
She says you have some goodly jest in hand:
She will not come: she bids you come to her.

PETRUCHIO:
Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile,
Intolerable, not to be endured!
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress;
Say, I command her to come to me.

HORTENSIO:
I know her answer.

PETRUCHIO:
What?

HORTENSIO:
She will not.

PETRUCHIO:
The fouler fortune mine, and there an end.

BAPTISTA:
Now, by my holidame, here comes Katharina!

KATHARINA:
What is your will, sir, that you send for me?

PETRUCHIO:
Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife?

KATHARINA:
They sit conferring by the parlor fire.

PETRUCHIO:
Go fetch them hither: if they deny to come.
Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands:
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.

LUCENTIO:
Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.

HORTENSIO:
And so it is: I wonder what it bodes.

PETRUCHIO:
Marry, peace it bodes, and love and quiet life,
And awful rule and right supremacy;
And, to be short, what not, that's sweet and happy?

BAPTISTA:
Now, fair befal thee, good Petruchio!
The wager thou hast won; and I will add
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns;
Another dowry to another daughter,
For she is changed, as she had never been.

PETRUCHIO:
Nay, I will win my wager better yet
And show more sign of her obedience,
Her new-built virtue and obedience.
See where she comes and brings your froward wives
As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.
Katharina, that cap of yours becomes you not:
Off with that bauble, throw it under-foot.

Widow:
Lord, let me never have a cause to sigh,
Till I be brought to such a silly pass!

BIANCA:
Fie! what a foolish duty call you this?

LUCENTIO:
I would your duty were as foolish too:
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca,
Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time.

BIANCA:
The more fool you, for laying on my duty.

PETRUCHIO:
Katharina, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.

Widow:
Come, come, you're mocking: we will have no telling.

PETRUCHIO:
Come on, I say; and first begin with her.

Widow:
She shall not.

PETRUCHIO:
I say she shall: and first begin with her.

KATHARINA:
Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind brow,
And dart not scornful glances from those eyes,
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor:
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads,
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds,
And in no sense is meet or amiable.
A woman moved is like a fountain troubled,
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty;
And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty
Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper,
Thy head, thy sovereign; one that cares for thee,
And for thy maintenance commits his body
To painful labour both by sea and land,
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold,
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe;
And craves no other tribute at thy hands
But love, fair looks and true obedience;
Too little payment for so great a debt.
Such duty as the subject owes the prince
Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
And not obedient to his honest will,
What is she but a foul contending rebel
And graceless traitor to her loving lord?
I am ashamed that women are so simple
To offer war where they should kneel for peace;
Or seek for rule, supremacy and sway,
When they are bound to serve, love and obey.
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth,
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world,
But that our soft conditions and our hearts
Should well agree with our external parts?
Come, come, you froward and unable worms!
My mind hath been as big as one of yours,
My heart as great, my reason haply more,
To bandy word for word and frown for frown;
But now I see our lances are but straws,
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare,
That seeming to be most which we indeed least are.
Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot,
And place your hands below your husband's foot:
In token of which duty, if he please,
My hand is ready; may it do him ease.

PETRUCHIO:
Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss me, Kate.

LUCENTIO:
Well, go thy ways, old lad; for thou shalt ha't.

VINCENTIO:
'Tis a good hearing when children are toward.

LUCENTIO:
But a harsh hearing when women are froward.

PETRUCHIO:
Come, Kate, we'll to bed.
We three are married, but you two are sped.
'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white;
And, being a winner, God give you good night!

HORTENSIO:
Now, go thy ways; thou hast tamed a curst shrew.

LUCENTIO:
'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.

Master:
Boatswain!

Boatswain:
Here, master: what cheer?

Master:
Good, speak to the mariners: fall to't, yarely,
or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.

Boatswain:
Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts!
yare, yare! Take in the topsail. Tend to the
master's whistle. Blow, till thou burst thy wind,
if room enough!

ALONSO:
Good boatswain, have care. Where's the master?
Play the men.

Boatswain:
I pray now, keep below.

ANTONIO:
Where is the master, boatswain?

Boatswain:
Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your
cabins: you do assist the storm.

GONZALO:
Nay, good, be patient.

Boatswain:
When the sea is. Hence! What cares these roarers
for the name of king? To cabin: silence! trouble us not.

GONZALO:
Good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.

Boatswain:
None that I more love than myself. You are a
counsellor; if you can command these elements to
silence, and work the peace of the present, we will
not hand a rope more; use your authority: if you
cannot, give thanks you have lived so long, and make
yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of
the hour, if it so hap. Cheerly, good hearts! Out
of our way, I say.

GONZALO:
I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he
hath no drowning mark upon him; his complexion is
perfect gallows. Stand fast, good Fate, to his
hanging: make the rope of his destiny our cable,
for our own doth little advantage. If he be not
born to be hanged, our case is miserable.

Boatswain:
Down with the topmast! yare! lower, lower! Bring
her to try with main-course.
A plague upon this howling! they are louder than
the weather or our office.
Yet again! what do you here? Shall we give o'er
and drown? Have you a mind to sink?

SEBASTIAN:
A pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous,
incharitable dog!

Boatswain:
Work you then.

ANTONIO:
Hang, cur! hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker!
We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.

GONZALO:
I'll warrant him for drowning; though the ship were
no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an
unstanched wench.

Boatswain:
Lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses off to
sea again; lay her off.

Mariners:
All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost!

Boatswain:
What, must our mouths be cold?

GONZALO:
The king and prince at prayers! let's assist them,
For our case is as theirs.

SEBASTIAN:
I'm out of patience.

ANTONIO:
We are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards:
This wide-chapp'd rascal--would thou mightst lie drowning
The washing of ten tides!

GONZALO:
He'll be hang'd yet,
Though every drop of water swear against it
And gape at widest to glut him.

ANTONIO:
Let's all sink with the king.

SEBASTIAN:
Let's take leave of him.

GONZALO:
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an
acre of barren ground, long heath, brown furze, any
thing. The wills above be done! but I would fain
die a dry death.

MIRANDA:
If by your art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.
The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch,
But that the sea, mounting to the welkin's cheek,
Dashes the fire out. O, I have suffered
With those that I saw suffer: a brave vessel,
Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her,
Dash'd all to pieces. O, the cry did knock
Against my very heart. Poor souls, they perish'd.
Had I been any god of power, I would
Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere
It should the good ship so have swallow'd and
The fraughting souls within her.

PROSPERO:
Be collected:
No more amazement: tell your piteous heart
There's no harm done.

MIRANDA:
O, woe the day!

PROSPERO:
No harm.
I have done nothing but in care of thee,
Of thee, my dear one, thee, my daughter, who
Art ignorant of what thou art, nought knowing
Of whence I am, nor that I am more better
Than Prospero, master of a full poor cell,
And thy no greater father.

MIRANDA:
More to know
Did never meddle with my thoughts.

PROSPERO:
'Tis time
I should inform thee farther. Lend thy hand,
And pluck my magic garment from me. So:
Lie there, my art. Wipe thou thine eyes; have comfort.
The direful spectacle of the wreck, which touch'd
The very virtue of compassion in thee,
I have with such provision in mine art
So safely ordered that there is no soul--
No, not so much perdition as an hair
Betid to any creature in the vessel
Which thou heard'st cry, which thou saw'st sink. Sit down;
For thou must now know farther.

MIRANDA:
You have often
Begun to tell me what I am, but stopp'd
And left me to a bootless inquisition,
Concluding 'Stay: not yet.'

PROSPERO:
The hour's now come;
The very minute bids thee ope thine ear;
Obey and be attentive. Canst thou remember
A time before we came unto this cell?
I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not
Out three years old.

MIRANDA:
Certainly, sir, I can.

PROSPERO:
By what? by any other house or person?
Of any thing the image tell me that
Hath kept with thy remembrance.

MIRANDA:
'Tis far off
And rather like a dream than an assurance
That my remembrance warrants. Had I not
Four or five women once that tended me?

PROSPERO:
Thou hadst, and more, Miranda. But how is it
That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else
In the dark backward and abysm of time?
If thou remember'st aught ere thou camest here,
How thou camest here thou mayst.

MIRANDA:
But that I do not.

PROSPERO:
Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since,
Thy father was the Duke of Milan and
A prince of power.

MIRANDA:
Sir, are not you my father?

PROSPERO:
Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and
She said thou wast my daughter; and thy father
Was Duke of Milan; and thou his only heir
And princess no worse issued.

MIRANDA:
O the heavens!
What foul play had we, that we came from thence?
Or blessed was't we did?

PROSPERO:
Both, both, my girl:
By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heaved thence,
But blessedly holp hither.

MIRANDA:
O, my heart bleeds
To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to,
Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.

PROSPERO:
My brother and thy uncle, call'd Antonio--
I pray thee, mark me--that a brother should
Be so perfidious!--he whom next thyself
Of all the world I loved and to him put
The manage of my state; as at that time
Through all the signories it was the first
And Prospero the prime duke, being so reputed
In dignity, and for the liberal arts
Without a parallel; those being all my study,
The government I cast upon my brother
And to my state grew stranger, being transported
And rapt in secret studies. Thy false uncle--
Dost thou attend me?

MIRANDA:
Sir, most heedfully.

PROSPERO:
Being once perfected how to grant suits,
How to deny them, who to advance and who
To trash for over-topping, new created
The creatures that were mine, I say, or changed 'em,
Or else new form'd 'em; having both the key
Of officer and office, set all hearts i' the state
To what tune pleased his ear; that now he was
The ivy which had hid my princely trunk,
And suck'd my verdure out on't. Thou attend'st not.

MIRANDA:
O, good sir, I do.

PROSPERO:
I pray thee, mark me.
I, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated
To closeness and the bettering of my mind
With that which, but by being so retired,
O'er-prized all popular rate, in my false brother
Awaked an evil nature; and my trust,
Like a good parent, did beget of him
A falsehood in its contrary as great
As my trust was; which had indeed no limit,
A confidence sans bound. He being thus lorded,
Not only with what my revenue yielded,
But what my power might else exact, like one
Who having into truth, by telling of it,
Made such a sinner of his memory,
To credit his own lie, he did believe
He was indeed the duke; out o' the substitution
And executing the outward face of royalty,
With all prerogative: hence his ambition growing--
Dost thou hear?

MIRANDA:
Your tale, sir, would cure deafness.

PROSPERO:
To have no screen between this part he play'd
And him he play'd it for, he needs will be
Absolute Milan. Me, poor man, my library
Was dukedom large enough: of temporal royalties
He thinks me now incapable; confederates--
So dry he was for sway--wi' the King of Naples
To give him annual tribute, do him homage,
Subject his coronet to his crown and bend
The dukedom yet unbow'd--alas, poor Milan!--
To most ignoble stooping.

MIRANDA:
O the heavens!

PROSPERO:
Mark his condition and the event; then tell me
If this might be a brother.

MIRANDA:
I should sin
To think but nobly of my grandmother:
Good wombs have borne bad sons.

PROSPERO:
Now the condition.
The King of Naples, being an enemy
To me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit;
Which was, that he, in lieu o' the premises
Of homage and I know not how much tribute,
Should presently extirpate me and mine
Out of the dukedom and confer fair Milan
With all the honours on my brother: whereon,
A treacherous army levied, one midnight
Fated to the purpose did Antonio open
The gates of Milan, and, i' the dead of darkness,
The ministers for the purpose hurried thence
Me and thy crying self.

MIRANDA:
Alack, for pity!
I, not remembering how I cried out then,
Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint
That wrings mine eyes to't.

PROSPERO:
Hear a little further
And then I'll bring thee to the present business
Which now's upon's; without the which this story
Were most impertinent.

MIRANDA:
Wherefore did they not
That hour destroy us?

PROSPERO:
Well demanded, wench:
My tale provokes that question. Dear, they durst not,
So dear the love my people bore me, nor set
A mark so bloody on the business, but
With colours fairer painted their foul ends.
In few, they hurried us aboard a bark,
Bore us some leagues to sea; where they prepared
A rotten carcass of a boat, not rigg'd,
Nor tackle, sail, nor mast; the very rats
Instinctively had quit it: there they hoist us,
To cry to the sea that roar'd to us, to sigh
To the winds whose pity, sighing back again,
Did us but loving wrong.

MIRANDA:
Alack, what trouble
Was I then to you!

PROSPERO:
O, a cherubim
Thou wast that did preserve me. Thou didst smile.
Infused with a fortitude from heaven,
When I have deck'd the sea with drops full salt,
Under my burthen groan'd; which raised in me
An undergoing stomach, to bear up
Against what should ensue.

MIRANDA:
How came we ashore?

PROSPERO:
By Providence divine.
Some food we had and some fresh water that
A noble Neapolitan, Gonzalo,
Out of his charity, being then appointed
Master of this design, did give us, with
Rich garments, linens, stuffs and necessaries,
Which since have steaded much; so, of his gentleness,
Knowing I loved my books, he furnish'd me
From mine own library with volumes that
I prize above my dukedom.

MIRANDA:
Would I might
But ever see that man!

PROSPERO:
Now I arise:
Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.
Here in this island we arrived; and here
Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit
Than other princesses can that have more time
For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.

MIRANDA:
Heavens thank you for't! And now, I pray you, sir,
For still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason
For raising this sea-storm?

PROSPERO:
Know thus far forth.
By accident most strange, bountiful Fortune,
Now my dear lady, hath mine enemies
Brought to this shore; and by my prescience
I find my zenith doth depend upon
A most auspicious star, whose influence
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes
Will ever after droop. Here cease more questions:
Thou art inclined to sleep; 'tis a good dulness,
And give it way: I know thou canst not choose.
Come away, servant, come. I am ready now.
Approach, my Ariel, come.

ARIEL:
All hail, great master! grave sir, hail! I come
To answer thy best pleasure; be't to fly,
To swim, to dive into the fire, to ride
On the curl'd clouds, to thy strong bidding task
Ariel and all his quality.

PROSPERO:
Hast thou, spirit,
Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee?

ARIEL:
To every article.
I boarded the king's ship; now on the beak,
Now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin,
I flamed amazement: sometime I'ld divide,
And burn in many places; on the topmast,
The yards and bowsprit, would I flame distinctly,
Then meet and join. Jove's lightnings, the precursors
O' the dreadful thunder-claps, more momentary
And sight-outrunning were not; the fire and cracks
Of sulphurous roaring the most mighty Neptune
Seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble,
Yea, his dread trident shake.

PROSPERO:
My brave spirit!
Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil
Would not infect his reason?

ARIEL:
Not a soul
But felt a fever of the mad and play'd
Some tricks of desperation. All but mariners
Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel,
Then all afire with me: the king's son, Ferdinand,
With hair up-staring,--then like reeds, not hair,--
Was the first man that leap'd; cried, 'Hell is empty
And all the devils are here.'

PROSPERO:
Why that's my spirit!
But was not this nigh shore?

ARIEL:
Close by, my master.

PROSPERO:
But are they, Ariel, safe?

ARIEL:
Not a hair perish'd;
On their sustaining garments not a blemish,
But fresher than before: and, as thou badest me,
In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.
The king's son have I landed by himself;
Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs
In an odd angle of the isle and sitting,
His arms in this sad knot.

PROSPERO:
Of the king's ship
The mariners say how thou hast disposed
And all the rest o' the fleet.

ARIEL:
Safely in harbour
Is the king's ship; in the deep nook, where once
Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew
From the still-vex'd Bermoothes, there she's hid:
The mariners all under hatches stow'd;
Who, with a charm join'd to their suffer'd labour,
I have left asleep; and for the rest o' the fleet
Which I dispersed, they all have met again
And are upon the Mediterranean flote,
Bound sadly home for Naples,
Supposing that they saw the king's ship wreck'd
And his great person perish.

PROSPERO:
Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is perform'd: but there's more work.
What is the time o' the day?

ARIEL:
Past the mid season.

PROSPERO:
At least two glasses. The time 'twixt six and now
Must by us both be spent most preciously.

ARIEL:
Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains,
Let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
Which is not yet perform'd me.

PROSPERO:
How now? moody?
What is't thou canst demand?

ARIEL:
My liberty.

PROSPERO:
Before the time be out? no more!

ARIEL:
I prithee,
Remember I have done thee worthy service;
Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served
Without or grudge or grumblings: thou didst promise
To bate me a full year.

PROSPERO:
Dost thou forget
From what a torment I did free thee?

ARIEL:
No.

PROSPERO:
Thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze
Of the salt deep,
To run upon the sharp wind of the north,
To do me business in the veins o' the earth
When it is baked with frost.

ARIEL:
I do not, sir.

PROSPERO:
Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot
The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy
Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?

ARIEL:
No, sir.

PROSPERO:
Thou hast. Where was she born? speak; tell me.

ARIEL:
Sir, in Argier.

PROSPERO:
O, was she so? I must
Once in a month recount what thou hast been,
Which thou forget'st. This damn'd witch Sycorax,
For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible
To enter human hearing, from Argier,
Thou know'st, was banish'd: for one thing she did
They would not take her life. Is not this true?

ARIEL:
Ay, sir.

PROSPERO:
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child
And here was left by the sailors. Thou, my slave,
As thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant;
And, for thou wast a spirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorr'd commands,
Refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee,
By help of her more potent ministers
And in her most unmitigable rage,
Into a cloven pine; within which rift
Imprison'd thou didst painfully remain
A dozen years; within which space she died
And left thee there; where thou didst vent thy groans
As fast as mill-wheels strike. Then was this island--
Save for the son that she did litter here,
A freckled whelp hag-born--not honour'd with
A human shape.

ARIEL:
Yes, Caliban her son.

PROSPERO:
Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban
Whom now I keep in service. Thou best know'st
What torment I did find thee in; thy groans
Did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts
Of ever angry bears: it was a torment
To lay upon the damn'd, which Sycorax
Could not again undo: it was mine art,
When I arrived and heard thee, that made gape
The pine and let thee out.

ARIEL:
I thank thee, master.

PROSPERO:
If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak
And peg thee in his knotty entrails till
Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters.

ARIEL:
Pardon, master;
I will be correspondent to command
And do my spiriting gently.

PROSPERO:
Do so, and after two days
I will discharge thee.

ARIEL:
That's my noble master!
What shall I do? say what; what shall I do?

PROSPERO:
Go make thyself like a nymph o' the sea: be subject
To no sight but thine and mine, invisible
To every eyeball else. Go take this shape
And hither come in't: go, hence with diligence!
Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well; Awake!

MIRANDA:
The strangeness of your story put
Heaviness in me.

PROSPERO:
Shake it off. Come on;
We'll visit Caliban my slave, who never
Yields us kind answer.

MIRANDA:
'Tis a villain, sir,
I do not love to look on.

PROSPERO:
But, as 'tis,
We cannot miss him: he does make our fire,
Fetch in our wood and serves in offices
That profit us. What, ho! slave! Caliban!
Thou earth, thou! speak.

CALIBAN:

PROSPERO:
Come forth, I say! there's other business for thee:
Come, thou tortoise! when?
Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel,
Hark in thine ear.

ARIEL:
My lord it shall be done.

PROSPERO:
Thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
Upon thy wicked dam, come forth!

CALIBAN:
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd
With raven's feather from unwholesome fen
Drop on you both! a south-west blow on ye
And blister you all o'er!

PROSPERO:
For this, be sure, to-night thou shalt have cramps,
Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up; urchins
Shall, for that vast of night that they may work,
All exercise on thee; thou shalt be pinch'd
As thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
Than bees that made 'em.

CALIBAN:
I must eat my dinner.
This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother,
Which thou takest from me. When thou camest first,
Thou strokedst me and madest much of me, wouldst give me
Water with berries in't, and teach me how
To name the bigger light, and how the less,
That burn by day and night: and then I loved thee
And show'd thee all the qualities o' the isle,
The fresh springs, brine-pits, barren place and fertile:
Cursed be I that did so! All the charms
Of Sycorax, toads, beetles, bats, light on you!
For I am all the subjects that you have,
Which first was mine own king: and here you sty me
In this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me
The rest o' the island.

PROSPERO:
Thou most lying slave,
Whom stripes may move, not kindness! I have used thee,
Filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honour of my child.

CALIBAN:
O ho, O ho! would't had been done!
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans.

PROSPERO:
Abhorred slave,
Which any print of goodness wilt not take,
Being capable of all ill! I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other: when thou didst not, savage,
Know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like
A thing most brutish, I endow'd thy purposes
With words that made them known. But thy vile race,
Though thou didst learn, had that in't which
good natures
Could not abide to be with; therefore wast thou
Deservedly confined into this rock,
Who hadst deserved more than a prison.

CALIBAN:
You taught me language; and my profit on't
Is, I know how to curse. The red plague rid you
For learning me your language!

PROSPERO:
Hag-seed, hence!
Fetch us in fuel; and be quick, thou'rt best,
To answer other business. Shrug'st thou, malice?
If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly
What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps,
Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar
That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

CALIBAN:
No, pray thee.
I must obey: his art is of such power,
It would control my dam's god, Setebos,
and make a vassal of him.

PROSPERO:
So, slave; hence!
Come unto these yellow sands,
And then take hands:
Courtsied when you have and kiss'd
The wild waves whist,
Foot it featly here and there;
And, sweet sprites, the burthen bear.
Hark, hark!

FERDINAND:
Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth?
It sounds no more: and sure, it waits upon
Some god o' the island. Sitting on a bank,
Weeping again the king my father's wreck,
This music crept by me upon the waters,
Allaying both their fury and my passion
With its sweet air: thence I have follow'd it,
Or it hath drawn me rather. But 'tis gone.
No, it begins again.
Full fathom five thy father lies;
Of his bones are coral made;
Those are pearls that were his eyes:
Nothing of him that doth fade
But doth suffer a sea-change
Into something rich and strange.
Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell
Hark! now I hear them,--Ding-dong, bell.

FERDINAND:
The ditty does remember my drown'd father.
This is no mortal business, nor no sound
That the earth owes. I hear it now above me.

PROSPERO:
The fringed curtains of thine eye advance
And say what thou seest yond.

MIRANDA:
What is't? a spirit?
Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir,
It carries a brave form. But 'tis a spirit.

PROSPERO:
No, wench; it eats and sleeps and hath such senses
As we have, such. This gallant which thou seest
Was in the wreck; and, but he's something stain'd
With grief that's beauty's canker, thou mightst call him
A goodly person: he hath lost his fellows
And strays about to find 'em.

MIRANDA:
I might call him
A thing divine, for nothing natural
I ever saw so noble.

PROSPERO:

FERDINAND:
Most sure, the goddess
On whom these airs attend! Vouchsafe my prayer
May know if you remain upon this island;
And that you will some good instruction give
How I may bear me here: my prime request,
Which I do last pronounce, is, O you wonder!
If you be maid or no?

MIRANDA:
No wonder, sir;
But certainly a maid.

FERDINAND:
My language! heavens!
I am the best of them that speak this speech,
Were I but where 'tis spoken.

PROSPERO:
How? the best?
What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee?

FERDINAND:
A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep: myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The king my father wreck'd.

MIRANDA:
Alack, for mercy!

FERDINAND:
Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.

PROSPERO:

MIRANDA:
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that e'er I saw, the first
That e'er I sigh'd for: pity move my father
To be inclined my way!

FERDINAND:
O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, I'll make you
The queen of Naples.

PROSPERO:
Soft, sir! one word more.
They are both in either's powers; but this swift business
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
Make the prize light.
One word more; I charge thee
That thou attend me: thou dost here usurp
The name thou owest not; and hast put thyself
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
From me, the lord on't.

FERDINAND:
No, as I am a man.

MIRANDA:
There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell with't.

PROSPERO:
Follow me.
Speak not you for him; he's a traitor. Come;
I'll manacle thy neck and feet together:
Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
The fresh-brook muscles, wither'd roots and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.

FERDINAND:
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.

MIRANDA:
O dear father,
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
He's gentle and not fearful.

PROSPERO:
What? I say,
My foot my tutor? Put thy sword up, traitor;
Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience
Is so possess'd with guilt: come from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
And make thy weapon drop.

MIRANDA:
Beseech you, father.

PROSPERO:
Hence! hang not on my garments.

MIRANDA:
Sir, have pity;
I'll be his surety.

PROSPERO:
Silence! one word more
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
An advocate for an imposter! hush!
Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he,
Having seen but him and Caliban: foolish wench!
To the most of men this is a Caliban
And they to him are angels.

MIRANDA:
My affections
Are then most humble; I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.

PROSPERO:
Come on; obey:
Thy nerves are in their infancy again
And have no vigour in them.

FERDINAND:
So they are;
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wreck of all my friends, nor this man's threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid: all corners else o' the earth
Let liberty make use of; space enough
Have I in such a prison.

PROSPERO:

MIRANDA:
Be of comfort;
My father's of a better nature, sir,
Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
Which now came from him.

PROSPERO:
Thou shalt be free
As mountain winds: but then exactly do
All points of my command.

ARIEL:
To the syllable.

PROSPERO:
Come, follow. Speak not for him.

GONZALO:
Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
So have we all, of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day some sailor's wife,
The masters of some merchant and the merchant
Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
I mean our preservation, few in millions
Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.

ALONSO:
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN:
He receives comfort like cold porridge.

ANTONIO:
The visitor will not give him o'er so.

SEBASTIAN:
Look he's winding up the watch of his wit;
by and by it will strike.

GONZALO:
Sir,--

SEBASTIAN:
One: tell.

GONZALO:
When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd,
Comes to the entertainer--

SEBASTIAN:
A dollar.

GONZALO:
Dolour comes to him, indeed: you
have spoken truer than you purposed.

SEBASTIAN:
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.

GONZALO:
Therefore, my lord,--

ANTONIO:
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!

ALONSO:
I prithee, spare.

GONZALO:
Well, I have done: but yet,--

SEBASTIAN:
He will be talking.

ANTONIO:
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good
wager, first begins to crow?

SEBASTIAN:
The old cock.

ANTONIO:
The cockerel.

SEBASTIAN:
Done. The wager?

ANTONIO:
A laughter.

SEBASTIAN:
A match!

ADRIAN:
Though this island seem to be desert,--

SEBASTIAN:
Ha, ha, ha! So, you're paid.

ADRIAN:
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible,--

SEBASTIAN:
Yet,--

ADRIAN:
Yet,--

ANTONIO:
He could not miss't.

ADRIAN:
It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate
temperance.

ANTONIO:
Temperance was a delicate wench.

SEBASTIAN:
Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.

ADRIAN:
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.

SEBASTIAN:
As if it had lungs and rotten ones.

ANTONIO:
Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.

GONZALO:
Here is everything advantageous to life.

ANTONIO:
True; save means to live.

SEBASTIAN:
Of that there's none, or little.

GONZALO:
How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!

ANTONIO:
The ground indeed is tawny.

SEBASTIAN:
With an eye of green in't.

ANTONIO:
He misses not much.

SEBASTIAN:
No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.

GONZALO:
But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost
beyond credit,--

SEBASTIAN:
As many vouched rarities are.

GONZALO:
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in
the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and
glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with
salt water.

ANTONIO:
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not
say he lies?

SEBASTIAN:
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report

GONZALO:
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we
put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of
the king's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.

SEBASTIAN:
'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.

ADRIAN:
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to
their queen.

GONZALO:
Not since widow Dido's time.

ANTONIO:
Widow! a pox o' that! How came that widow in?
widow Dido!

SEBASTIAN:
What if he had said 'widower AEneas' too? Good Lord,
how you take it!

ADRIAN:
'Widow Dido' said you? you make me study of that:
she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.

GONZALO:
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.

ADRIAN:
Carthage?

GONZALO:
I assure you, Carthage.

SEBASTIAN:
His word is more than the miraculous harp; he hath
raised the wall and houses too.

ANTONIO:
What impossible matter will he make easy next?

SEBASTIAN:
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket
and give it his son for an apple.

ANTONIO:
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
forth more islands.

GONZALO:
Ay.

ANTONIO:
Why, in good time.

GONZALO:
Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
of your daughter, who is now queen.

ANTONIO:
And the rarest that e'er came there.

SEBASTIAN:
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.

ANTONIO:
O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.

GONZALO:
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
wore it? I mean, in a sort.

ANTONIO:
That sort was well fished for.

GONZALO:
When I wore it at your daughter's marriage?

ALONSO:
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed
I ne'er again shall see her. O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?

FRANCISCO:
Sir, he may live:
I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoln that met him; his bold head
'Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To the shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bow'd,
As stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
He came alive to land.

ALONSO:
No, no, he's gone.

SEBASTIAN:
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African;
Where she at least is banish'd from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief on't.

ALONSO:
Prithee, peace.

SEBASTIAN:
You were kneel'd to and importuned otherwise
By all of us, and the fair soul herself
Weigh'd between loathness and obedience, at
Which end o' the beam should bow. We have lost your
son,
I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business' making
Than we bring men to comfort them:
The fault's your own.

ALONSO:
So is the dear'st o' the loss.

GONZALO:
My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in: you rub the sore,
When you should bring the plaster.

SEBASTIAN:
Very well.

ANTONIO:
And most chirurgeonly.

GONZALO:
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.

SEBASTIAN:
Foul weather?

ANTONIO:
Very foul.

GONZALO:
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,--

ANTONIO:
He'ld sow't with nettle-seed.

SEBASTIAN:
Or docks, or mallows.

GONZALO:
And were the king on't, what would I do?

SEBASTIAN:
'Scape being drunk for want of wine.

GONZALO:
I' the commonwealth I would by contraries
Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all;
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty;--

SEBASTIAN:
Yet he would be king on't.

ANTONIO:
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
beginning.

GONZALO:
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour: treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.

SEBASTIAN:
No marrying 'mong his subjects?

ANTONIO:
None, man; all idle: whores and knaves.

GONZALO:
I would with such perfection govern, sir,
To excel the golden age.

SEBASTIAN:
God save his majesty!

ANTONIO:
Long live Gonzalo!

GONZALO:
And,--do you mark me, sir?

ALONSO:
Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.

GONZALO:
I do well believe your highness; and
did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that
they always use to laugh at nothing.

ANTONIO:
'Twas you we laughed at.

GONZALO:
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing
to you: so you may continue and laugh at
nothing still.

ANTONIO:
What a blow was there given!

SEBASTIAN:
An it had not fallen flat-long.

GONZALO:
You are gentlemen of brave metal; you would lift
the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
in it five weeks without changing.

SEBASTIAN:
We would so, and then go a bat-fowling.

ANTONIO:
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.

GONZALO:
No, I warrant you; I will not adventure
my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
me asleep, for I am very heavy?

ANTONIO:
Go sleep, and hear us.

ALONSO:
What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find
They are inclined to do so.

SEBASTIAN:
Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.

ANTONIO:
We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.

ALONSO:
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.

SEBASTIAN:
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!

ANTONIO:
It is the quality o' the climate.

SEBASTIAN:
Why
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
Myself disposed to sleep.

ANTONIO:
Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
They fell together all, as by consent;
They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might?--No more:--
And yet me thinks I see it in thy face,
What thou shouldst be: the occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.

SEBASTIAN:
What, art thou waking?

ANTONIO:
Do you not hear me speak?

SEBASTIAN:
I do; and surely
It is a sleepy language and thou speak'st
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
And yet so fast asleep.

ANTONIO:
Noble Sebastian,
Thou let'st thy fortune sleep--die, rather; wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.

此文揭秘几千年来国人健康的秘密。看完本文，可知自己的身体构造基础，以及身体如何受外在五行元素的影响。作者已实践多年，准确率几乎100%，现用简单易懂的语言，公布于众，希望对大家有所帮助。话不多说，看正文：
我们知道自然界有五行：
 
也知道身体有五脏六腑（仅列举五脏机能）：
 
还知道五行与五脏六腑之间有一一对应关系：
 
这金、木、水、火、土都有阴阳两面，就像“白天”“黑夜“一个道理。即：
木分为阳木和阴木（阳木对应胆，阴木对应肝）；
火分为阳火和阴火（阳火对小肠，阴火对应心）；
土分为阳土和阴土（阳土对应胃，阴土对应脾）；
金分为阳金和阴金（阳金对大肠，阴金对应肺）；
水分为阳水和阴水（阳水对膀胱，阴水对应肾）。
这对应关系是固定不变的，用下图表示：
 
我们知道，我们之所以能健康生存，是因为我们有一整套上述器官。即我们体内必须要有（看上图）：肝胆、小肠、心、脾胃、大肠、脊椎、肺、牙齿、膀胱、肾脏等。这些器官，不能多也不能少！也就是说我们的健康是以匹配这样一整套器官作为前提。
 
能想象到，如果身体中的器官，大家功能正常，强弱差不多，那我们人会很健康，活蹦乱跳的。但如果某些器官不能正常运行，或者某些器官功能太强或者太弱，那可以预见，我们不健康不舒服、病怏怏。看下面的图：
 
很明显，第一幅图中，五脏的机能差不多，身体内若“安装”了这套脏腑器官，那身体是健康的。而第二幅图，肺脏的机能就比其他脏腑器官强太多，而脾胃机能特别弱，身体如果“安装”了这套脏腑器官，那这五脏之间的运行就容易出现问题。第三幅图也是一样，心脏机能特别强，而肾脏机能特别弱，“安装”这样的五脏也会有不健康的因素（五脏如此，六腑也是一个道理，各器官机能差不多，人才会健康）。
 
我们更进一步考虑，如果身体内缺失一个器官会怎样？
 
如上图，如果身体没有阳木对应的胆，那这个人胆具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失，即促进消化吸收的功能就缺失了，除此之外，胆气也会不足，做事犹犹豫豫，不敢决断。阳木对应自然界的参天大树，古人是用大树的枝干作为新房的栋梁，所以阳木性格多的人上进心足、事业心重，一心想成为栋梁之材。而一旦缺失阳木，那此人多多少少会缺乏上进心。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阴木对应的肝，那这个人肝具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。肝主管身体脉络、通道，以及神经系统的条理通达，还主管人体营养吸收。一旦肝功能缺失则会营养吸收不良，人偏瘦；遇事条理分析不清，抑郁难耐甚至脾气大爆发等。肝机能强，此人必定条理顺达，思路开阔清晰，理性思维比较好。甚至酒量都会比较好，只因肝具有解酒能力，解酒能力强大。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阳火对应的小肠，那这个人小肠具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。小肠主管身体营养吸收。阳火对应自然界的太阳，太阳具备发光发热而且无私奉献的特性，所以阳火也一样，身体有阳火的人，都有奉献精神，都有爱心而且没有私心。正因为无私奉献，所以就比较在意别人对自己的看法，所以身体带了阳火的人，又会有一些虚荣心。一旦缺失阳火，那此人就寡言少语，给人一种话不多、冷冰冰难以靠近的感觉。一个人阳火旺，则此人必定阳光向上，能言善辩，乐于奉献。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阴火对应的心脏，那这个人心脏具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。心脏是人体最重要的器官。心火不旺容易导致身体怕冷、手脚冰凉、精力不旺等。因为心脏就像一个泵，人体是通过心脏跳动将营养和热量通过血液传递到身体各处。心火跟其他五行不一样，其没有实质，而是一种虚拟的物质，因其虚拟性，所以心火在人际交往中，还对应着人与人之间的关系。一旦心火弱，还会表现为不擅长交际等。相反，一个人丁火旺，则心火旺，心气高，特别懂人情世故，善于处理人际关系。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阳土对应的胃，那这个人胃具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。胃是人体消化器官，没有胃进行食物消化，那人体需要的营养就无从谈起。土是一切物质的基础，也是五行的基础物质，自然界中的所有事物，都是建立在土上的。就像我们看到的高楼大厦，花草树木。如果一个人，身体缺少了土气，那除了身体消化机能弱之外，还有一点应该特别注意，就是做事不够踏实。如果不能一步一个脚印，做事不踏实，那往往最后会有“崩盘”的可能。一个人阳土旺，那此人多是踏实可靠，厚重值得信任。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阴土对应的脾，那这个人脾具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。脾主管人体水谷运化，把胃消化的食物精华转化成身体能吸收的成分。脾有滤血的功能，可以将血液中的杂质过滤。脾功能缺失，容易有营养吸收不好，血液杂质过多的事出现。一个人身体脾很旺的话，那此人必定善于运化水谷，往往在社会活动中是幕后出谋划策、运筹帷幄的高手。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阳金对应的大肠、脊椎，那这个人大肠、脊椎等具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。常常伴随着肠干，脊椎疼痛，骨质增生等问题出现。因为金本身是五行中最硬的东西，对应到身体里，也是脊椎这样支撑人身体的最硬的东西。缺金的话，除了上述体质问题外，还会在脾性上表现出一些“懦弱”的性格，比如不敢与人争执，不敢与人发生碰撞，遇到困难容易放弃等。阳金对应自然界的刀斧利器，不但质地硬，而且有刃，所以金气旺的人杀伐果断，铿锵有声，不惧困难，屡败屡战，不达目的不罢休，乃开拓型人才。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阴金对应的肺、牙齿，那这个人肺脏、牙齿等具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。常常会出现鼻炎、肺炎等呼吸道疾病，而且牙齿多蛀牙，牙齿出血、发黄易腐蚀等问题。相反，阴金对应的肺、牙齿等器官比较旺，那此人必定肺活量很大，牙齿坚硬，而且在现实生活中还会表现重感情，外柔内刚的一面。因为辛金对应自然界的珠宝软玉，所以阴金旺的人，往往看起来也会多一分贵气。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阳水对应的膀胱，那这个人膀胱具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。阳水缺失，因为膀胱主管人体泌尿系统，时间长了容易出现尿毒症、膀胱炎等问题。阳水对应自然界的江河湖海，是成气候波涛汹涌滚滚流动的水。阳水旺的话需要有堤岸（土）来约束，不然容易闹“水灾”。水正因为流动的本性，所以水旺的人聪明，因为其善于像水一样用发展变化的眼光看待问题，分析问题。
 
如上图，如果身体没有阴水对应的肾脏，那这个人肾脏具有的功能就特别弱，所具有的机能就会缺失。阴水缺失，肾功能如果弱，因为肾主管人体生殖系统，所以容易出现男女生殖系统疾病，前列腺炎，甚至不孕不育等问题。
至此，我们知晓了缺失了任何一样五行或者说五行对应的器官都是不行的，都是不健康的，更不用说缺少几样。
知晓了五行对应着五脏六腑的关系后，我们一定想快速查查自己的身体五行构造，该怎么查？--这里我们借用一下古人的智慧。几千年的中国文化源远流长，在长期实践中，古人认为构成我们身体健康要素的因素与我们出生的年、月、日、时息息相关，即生日里有我们人生的所有信息，自然包括健康基础。经实践发现，年、月、日、时所对应的天干地支，转换成五脏六腑来构建我们的身体，这种理论准确率接近100%。我们只需找一个万年历，或者查询“八字”的网站，将自己生日输入进去，查出自己生日对应的天干地支，然后把天干地支转化成五行，再查出五行对应的脏腑器官，就可以查出五行器官盈缺：
 
用天干地支来查各个器官的强弱，可简述如下：
 
看几个五行的案例：
 
既然通过五行可以发现一些身体潜在的问题，那我们自然可以通过五行进行提前预防或者适当改善，比如身体缺乏木元素，而木是身体特别需要的，那就在自己平时衣食住行方面多添加一些绿元素。同理，其他也是一样，如下图：
 
能力有限，总结至此。
希望此篇能造福世人！
让大家未来的路多一分健康！
已如愿，结善缘图片

This article reveals the secrets to the health of the Chinese people over thousands of years. After reading this article, you will understand the basic structure of your body and how it is influenced by the external Five Elements. The author has practiced this for many years with an accuracy rate of almost 100%, and now presents it to the public in simple and easy-to-understand language, hoping it will be helpful to everyone. Without further ado, let's read the main text:

We know that there are Five Elements in nature:

We also know that the body has Five Organs and Six Bowels (only listing the functions of the Five Organs):

We also know that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the Five Elements and the Five Organs and Six Bowels:

These Metal, Wood, Water, Fire, and Earth all have Yin and Yang aspects, just like "day" and "night." That is:
Wood is divided into Yang Wood and Yin Wood (Yang Wood corresponds to the gallbladder, Yin Wood corresponds to the liver);
Fire is divided into Yang Fire and Yin Fire (Yang Fire corresponds to the small intestine, Yin Fire corresponds to the heart);
Earth is divided into Yang Earth and Yin Earth (Yang Earth corresponds to the stomach, Yin Earth corresponds to the spleen);
Metal is divided into Yang Metal and Yin Metal (Yang Metal corresponds to the large intestine, Yin Metal corresponds to the lungs);
Water is divided into Yang Water and Yin Water (Yang Water corresponds to the bladder, Yin Water corresponds to the kidneys).

This correspondence is fixed and unchanging, as shown in the diagram below:

We know that our health depends on having a complete set of organs as described above. That is, our bodies must have (see the diagram above): liver, gallbladder, small intestine, heart, spleen, stomach, large intestine, spine, lungs, teeth, bladder, and kidneys. These organs cannot be more or less! In other words, our health is predicated on having a complete set of these organs.

Imagine if all the organs in the body function normally and are of similar strength, then we would be very healthy and energetic. However, if some organs malfunction, or if some organs are too strong or too weak, then we can foresee that we will be unhealthy, uncomfortable, and sickly. See the diagram below:

Clearly, in the first diagram, the functions of the five internal organs are roughly the same. If this set of organs is "installed" in the body, then the body is healthy. In the second diagram, the lungs function much stronger than the other organs, while the spleen and stomach function particularly weak. If this set of organs were "installed" in the body, then the operation between these five organs would easily become problematic. The third image shows a similar pattern: an exceptionally strong heart and exceptionally weak kidneys. Such an imbalance in the five internal organs (as with the five viscera, and the six bowels) indicates poor health (a balanced function of all organs is essential for good health).

Let's consider further: what happens if an organ is missing?

As shown in the image above, if the body lacks the gallbladder (corresponding to Yang Wood), its function will be significantly weakened, resulting in a deficiency in digestion and absorption. Furthermore, insufficient gallbladder energy will lead to indecisiveness and hesitation. Yang Wood corresponds to towering trees in nature; in ancient times, tree branches were used as beams for new houses. Therefore, people with a strong Yang Wood personality are ambitious, career-oriented, and aspire to be pillars of society. A lack of Yang Wood will likely result in a lack of ambition.

As shown in the image above, if the body lacks the liver (corresponding to Yin Wood), its function will be significantly weakened. The liver governs the body's meridians, channels, and the smooth flow of the nervous system, as well as the absorption of nutrients. Impaired liver function leads to poor nutrient absorption, resulting in a thin physique; difficulty in logical thinking, depression, and even outbursts of temper. Strong liver function indicates a person with clear thinking, a broad and logical mind, and good rational reasoning. They may even have a higher alcohol tolerance, as the liver has a strong ability to metabolize alcohol.

As shown in the diagram, if the body lacks the small intestine, which corresponds to Yang fire, its function will be particularly weak, resulting in deficiencies. The small intestine governs the body's nutrient absorption. Yang fire corresponds to the sun in nature, possessing the characteristics of radiating light and heat and selfless dedication. Similarly, people with Yang fire in their bodies tend to be selfless, compassionate, and without selfishness. Because of this selflessness, they are more concerned about others' opinions, and therefore may have some vanity. A lack of Yang fire results in a person who is taciturn, giving the impression of being quiet, cold, and unapproachable. A person with strong Yang Fire will be optimistic, eloquent, and dedicated.

As shown in the diagram, if the body lacks the heart, which corresponds to Yin Fire, then the heart's function will be particularly weak, resulting in deficiencies. The heart is the most important organ in the human body. Weak heart fire can easily lead to symptoms such as feeling cold, cold hands and feet, and low energy. This is because the heart acts like a pump, distributing nutrients and heat throughout the body via the blood. Unlike the other five elements, heart fire has no physical substance; it is a virtual entity. Due to its virtual nature, heart fire also corresponds to interpersonal relationships. Weak heart fire can manifest as poor social skills. Conversely, a person with strong Ding Fire will have strong heart fire, a high spirit, and be particularly adept at handling interpersonal relationships.

As shown in the diagram, if the body lacks the stomach, which corresponds to Yang Earth, then the stomach's function will be particularly weak, resulting in deficiencies. The stomach is the digestive organ; without a stomach to digest food, the body cannot obtain the necessary nutrients. Earth is the foundation of all matter and the basic element of the Five Elements. Everything in nature is built upon earth, like the skyscrapers, flowers, and trees we see. If a person lacks earth energy, besides weak digestive function, there's another point to pay special attention to: a lack of steadiness in their actions. If one cannot proceed step by step and is not steadfast in their work, there is often a possibility of eventual collapse. A person with strong Yang Earth energy is generally reliable, dependable, and trustworthy.

As shown in the diagram above, if the body lacks the spleen, which corresponds to Yin Earth, then the spleen's functions will be particularly weak, and its functions will be deficient. The spleen governs the transformation and transportation of food and water in the body, converting the essence of food digested by the stomach into components that the body can absorb. The spleen has the function of filtering blood, removing impurities. A weak spleen easily leads to poor nutrient absorption and excessive blood impurities. A person with a strong spleen is certainly adept at transforming food and water, often a master strategist and planner behind the scenes in social activities.

As shown in the diagram above, if the body lacks the large intestine and spine, which correspond to Yang Metal, the functions of these organs will be particularly weak, resulting in functional deficiencies. This is often accompanied by dry intestines, spinal pain, and bone spurs. This is because Metal is the hardest element in the Five Elements theory, corresponding to the spine, the strongest supporting structure in the body. A deficiency in Metal, besides the aforementioned physical issues, can also manifest as a "weak" personality, such as being afraid to argue or engage in conflict, and easily giving up when faced with difficulties. Yang Metal corresponds to sharp tools like knives and axes in nature; it is not only hard but also sharp. Therefore, people with strong Metal energy are decisive, resolute, fearless in the face of difficulties, persistent in their efforts, and never give up until they achieve their goals—truly pioneering individuals.

As shown in the diagram above, if the body lacks the lungs and teeth, which correspond to Yin Metal, the functions of these organs will be particularly weak, resulting in functional deficiencies. This often leads to respiratory illnesses such as rhinitis and pneumonia, as well as tooth decay, bleeding gums, yellowing teeth, and easy erosion of the teeth. Conversely, if Yin Metal corresponds to organs like the lungs and teeth and is strong, the person will likely have a large lung capacity, strong teeth, and will exhibit a strong emotional nature, appearing gentle yet inwardly resilient. Because Xin Metal corresponds to precious jade in nature, a strong Yin Metal person often appears more noble.

As shown in the diagram above, if the body lacks the Yang Water corresponding to the bladder, the bladder's function will be particularly weak, resulting in deficiencies. A lack of Yang Water, since the bladder governs the urinary system, can easily lead to uremia, cystitis, and other problems over time. Yang Water corresponds to rivers, lakes, and seas in nature, representing powerful, flowing water. Strong Yang Water needs to be restrained by embankments (earth) to prevent flooding. Because of water's flowing nature, a person with strong Water is intelligent, as they are adept at viewing and analyzing problems with a dynamic and evolving perspective, much like water.

As shown in the diagram above, if the body lacks the Yin Water corresponding to the kidneys, the kidneys' function will be particularly weak, resulting in deficiencies. A deficiency of Yin water (representing yin) can weaken kidney function, leading to reproductive system disorders in both men and women, prostatitis, and even infertility.

Thus, we understand that lacking any of the five elements or their corresponding organs is detrimental to health, let alone lacking several.

Having understood the relationship between the five elements and the five internal organs, we naturally want to quickly check our own body's five-element structure. How do we do this? -- Here, we borrow the wisdom of the ancients. With thousands of years of rich Chinese culture, the ancients believed, through long-term practice, that the factors constituting our health are closely related to the year, month, day, and hour of our birth. In other words, our birth date contains all the information about our lives, naturally including the foundation of our health. Practice has shown that the Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches corresponding to the year, month, day, and hour, when translated into the five internal organs to construct our body, have an accuracy rate approaching 100%. We simply need to find a perpetual calendar or a website that queries "Bazi" (Four Pillars of Destiny), enter our birth date, find the corresponding Heavenly Stem and Earthly Branch, convert them into the Five Elements, and then find the corresponding internal organs. This allows us to determine the balance of the Five Elements in our organs.

Using the Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches to check the strength of various organs can be summarized as follows:

Let's look at a few examples of the Five Elements:

Since we can discover some potential health problems through the Five Elements, we can naturally use them to prevent or appropriately improve them. For example, if the body lacks the Wood element, which is particularly needed by the body, we can add more green elements to our daily life, including clothing, food, housing, and transportation. Similarly, other elements can be identified, as shown in the image below:

My abilities are limited, so this is my summary.

I hope this article can benefit the world!

May everyone have a healthier future!

什么是无痕成交，不销而销
借上午自己粉丝群一个案例来说
 
这是我自己社群，上午一个粉丝提的问题
我就顺势使用这个问题，回答了我的思路，就是解决问题
然后在回答的过程中，顺势推出我的付费订阅
 
分享了一二三，在最后一个第三，就直接给了之前的付费文章
立马我就看到后台后付费数据
但不多
于是再次后续
 
这个再写完，后台就又有了数据
这就是销售，抓住时机，卖自己的产品，无痕成交
这些都是写作，能赚钱不是写作本身
思维，商业，销售思维
这些才是自媒体的基本功
 
销售 是要做到让人家心甘情愿付费，还感恩戴德
赚钱，是你给别人解决问题获得的回报。价格从来不是问题，只是手段，主要是你的价值最大化
纯写作，就付费文章都可以，上周六一篇50，照样有4个人买
200元，这都是写作能赚钱的证明
给大家一点参考，这是商业思维的价值，哈哈。自媒体只是手段工具，关键是你的价值+商业思维
做任何事情能坚持下去，只有一个，持续获得正反馈
What is seamless sales, selling without selling? Let me use an example from my own fan group this morning.

This is a question a fan asked in my own community this morning.

I used this question as a starting point to answer my question, explaining that it's about solving problems.

While answering, I subtly introduced my paid subscription.

I shared three points, and at the last point, the third, I directly mentioned the previously published paid article.

I immediately saw paid subscription data in the backend, but not much.

So I followed up.

After writing that, there was more data in the backend.

This is sales—seizing the opportunity to sell your product, seamless sales.

These are all about writing; making money isn't about the writing itself. It's about mindset, business acumen, and sales thinking.

These are the fundamental skills of self-media.

Sales is about getting people to willingly pay and feel grateful.

Making money is the reward you get for solving problems for others. Price is never the issue; it's just a means to an end. The key is maximizing your value. Even with pure writing, paid articles are possible. Last Saturday, one article cost 50 yuan, and four people still bought it.

200 yuan—this is proof that writing can make money. This is just for your reference; this is the value of business thinking, haha. Self-media is just a means to an end; the key is your value plus a business mindset. To persevere in anything, there's only one thing: consistently receive positive feedback.

大家好，现在开始今日分享 在分享过程中，请大家保持安静，谢谢大家
今日分享：公众号SEO 引流+收益双丰收 创造持久不断地收入 有人用这个方法卖减肥1年搞了400多万。
咱们已经学了很多节关于公众号挣收益的课程，今天咱们就来换换口味，学一下公众号SEO，这是一个新的知识，有利于大家往后做很多事情，比如做网站排名、做小红书排名、做抖音排名等，所以今天的课程将会带大家打开一个新的世界，让大家读懂什么是SEO，什么是稳定流量。
在咱们梧桐1群里，有个老学员，曾经通过用公众号SEO排名的方式去推广他的减肥产品，一年时间挣了400多万，这是老梧桐社群里面大家都众所周知的事情，所以，今天分享的这个方法，无论你是用来推广产品，还是用来挣流量收益，都是完全可行的！（如下图所示，这就是每天通过用公众号SEO的方式获得的流量，每天有2000-6000自然流量）
 
好了，咱们就先来科普一下什么是SEO，请大家记住这三个字母——“SEO”，因为但凡做网络项目，你一定得知道这三个字母的意思，也就是搜索引擎优化的意思，说到这里，又有很多人会问：什么是搜索引擎？
常见的搜索引擎就是：百度、360搜索、搜狗、谷歌等，但凡能用来搜东西的地方，我们都可以称之为搜索引擎，比如你在小红书上方的搜索框里搜东西，那个地方就叫搜索引擎，你想在梧桐有术里面搜索某个课程，搜索的那个地方也叫搜索引擎，而SEO的意思就是：通过一些技巧，让用户搜出来的内容里面，排名比较靠前的地方有属于你的作品。
咱们举个例子，当用户在微信里搜索“如何挑榴莲”，搜出来会有几百上千个标题里带有“如何挑榴莲”的文章，正好你的文章排名在第一位，那你的流量就绝对大于后面排名的那些文章，假设每天有1000个人搜索“如何挑榴莲”，那么每天你的公众号在不进行任何推广的情况下就有1000个自然流量。假设1000个自然流量有15块钱的收益，那么你每天躺着什么都不用干，就有15块钱的收益，这仅仅只是一篇文章给你带来的收益，如果你有几百上千篇文章呢？
好了，接下来咱们就来讲一下如何做公众号SEO，首先我们需要了解一个概念，那就是关键词，大家都用过百度或者小红书，我们也经常在百度或小红书里搜索：如何做红烧肉、狗狗感冒怎么办、肾虚吃什么比较补....等问题，这些问题就叫关键词，有的关键词不仅仅你一个人会搜，其他人也会在同一天里进行搜索，如果某个词在同一天时间内有1万个人搜索，那么这个关键词的指数就是1万。
举个例子，小红书上每天会有1万个人搜索“化妆步骤”，那么“化妆步骤”这个关键词的指数就是1万，如果你发了一个作品，正好带有“化妆步骤”四个字，正好又排名第一，那么每天你的作品阅读量就是1万左右。
如何知道一个关键词的指数是多少呢？我们可以通过在微信里搜索“微信指数”，找到“微信指数”小程序。
 
然后输入对应的关键词，就能查出来这个关键词在整个微信体系内的关注度，就比如“小吃配方”这个词，我们看一下指数。
 
小吃配方这个关键词的指数是222万，但微信指数并不代表搜索，它还把用户观看过的带有“小吃配方”关键词的内容也算进去了，如何判断这个词每天有多少人搜索呢？咱们看最下方，有个来路分析图，从这个图上我们就能判断出来具体搜索量是多少。
 
图中所示，来自搜一搜的比例是0.14%，那我们就用222万×0.14%=3108，也就是说，每天通过微信搜索“小吃配方”这个词的人有3100多个。
如果太懒，不想去挨个找这些关键词，不想去分析他们的指数，只想简单粗暴点，上去就是一顿干，怎么办呢？很简单，咱们可以在微信里搜索关键词的前面几个字。咱们先随便搜一个词，进入搜索引擎后再去搜索，如下图：
 
然后在上面搜索框里搜索你能想到的任何跟你行业有关的关键词前几个字，如下图：
 
  
大家看到没，当你字还没打完，底下就出现了很多相关词，这些词直接不用查，都是有指数的词，直接全部保存下来，以后写公众号的时候放在标题里用就行了，都是自带流量的词。
把这些词整理到文档里，后面咱们就可以在标题里加入这些关键词了，只要加入了这些词，那么咱们的内容一旦被收录，无论排名是第几，都会有自然流量进来。而我们所需要做的就是让咱们的作品排名更靠前一点，因为越靠前，自然流量就越大。
所以接下来咱们就来说一下怎么写标题了，最简单的方式就是用：关键词+痛点解决。
比如说：如何挑榴莲？看准这3个部位，肉一定不会少！
这个标题里，“如何挑榴莲”就是一个关键词，而后面半句就是痛点解决，这样就是一个非常吸引人的标题了，我们再举个例子：半夜牙疼怎么办？这4种做法让你3秒钟止痛！这句话里，哪里是关键词哪里是痛点解决，大家应该看懂了吧？对，我们的标题就是这么写的。
会写标题以后，接下来我们还需要在文章中做一些优化，为什么同样几篇文章，有的排名第一，有的排名第二，有的排名第50呢？如下图：
 
原因有3点：
1、标题关键词与搜索关键词匹配度接近。你看咱们搜的词，跟排名第一的标题里带的关键词是不是相似度很高？只是没有完全重合，如果你也写一篇文章，标题里带上“如何挑榴莲”，那么你就有可能排名第一了。
2、关键词密度。这个非常重要，包括百度SEO，也很看重关键词密度，说白了，就是你这个文章里，出现某个关键词的频率，如果某个关键词出现的频率越高，系统就会认为你这篇文章更有权威，所以排名也就相对更靠前一些。
3、账号垂直度。如果你的公众号平时更新的都是家具相关的内容，突然有一天更新了一篇“如何挑榴莲”的文章，那么你的排名就会没有人家专门写水果专门写榴莲的文章的排名高，因为人家的账号垂直，发的内容自带粉丝点击，每次点击都会带来额外权重，所以，垂直度越高的账号，文章排名自然也就越高。
看到这里，相信已经有不少小伙伴跃跃欲试了，已经知道大概怎样来优化自己的公众号文章让它有个不错的排名了，这里再简单的给大家总结一下步骤：
1、先把你的行业关键词全部找出来，最好是带有指数的。
2、写标题的时候，把你事先找好的关键词融入到你的标题里面。
3、这个关键词在文章中多出现几次，实在不知道把关键词塞到哪里的话，就把标题在文章中多粘贴几遍。如下图：
 
4、账号持续更新垂直内容。
能够做到这4点，你的公众号的文章整体排名就会非常靠前，当大量的文章都带有关键词，而且是有指数的关键词，那么即便你每天什么都不用干，仅仅只是那些关键词给你带来的自然搜索量就已经足够你衣食无忧了！
好了，今天分享的内容并不是一个具体的项目，而是一个很重要的知识，学会这个知识能让大家以后利用到各个领域，也会给大家带来比金钱更重要的知识，如果理解并学会今天的知识了，大家可以在下方回复：已学会公众号SEO矩阵引流+被动收益！
谢谢大家，分享完毕
Hello everyone, let's begin today's sharing. Please remain quiet during the sharing session, thank you.

Today's sharing: WeChat Official Account SEO - A Double Win for Traffic Generation and Revenue, Creating a Sustainable Income. Someone used this method to sell weight loss products and earned over 4 million yuan in a year.

We've already learned many lessons about making money through WeChat Official Accounts. Today, let's change things up and learn about WeChat Official Account SEO. This is new knowledge that will benefit you in many ways in the future, such as website ranking, Xiaohongshu ranking, and Douyin ranking. So today's lesson will open up a new world for you, allowing you to understand what SEO is and what stable traffic is.

In our Wutong Group 1, there's a veteran student who earned over 4 million yuan in a year by using WeChat Official Account SEO ranking to promote his weight loss products. This is well-known in the Wutong community. Therefore, the method shared today is completely feasible whether you use it to promote products or to generate traffic and revenue! (As shown in the image below, this is the traffic obtained daily through WeChat Official Account SEO, with 2000-6000 organic visits per day.)

Okay, let's first explain what SEO is. Please remember these three letters—"SEO"—because if you're doing any online project, you absolutely need to know what these three letters mean. It stands for Search Engine Optimization. Speaking of which, many people will ask: What is a search engine?

Common search engines include Baidu, 360 Search, Sogou, Google, etc. Any place that can be used to search for things can be called a search engine. For example, when you search for something in the search box at the top of Xiaohongshu, that place is a search engine. When you search for a course on Wutong Youshu, that search area is also a search engine. SEO means: using certain techniques to ensure that your work appears at the top of the search results.

Let's take an example. When a user searches for "how to choose a durian" on WeChat, hundreds or even thousands of articles with "how to choose a durian" in their titles will appear. If your article happens to rank first, your traffic will definitely be greater than those articles ranked lower. Let's say 1000 people search for "how to choose a durian" every day. That means your public account will have 1000 organic visitors every day without any promotion. If 1000 organic visitors generate 15 yuan in revenue, then you'll earn 15 yuan a day without doing anything. This is just the revenue from one article. What if you had hundreds or thousands of articles?


Okay, next let's talk about how to do WeChat Official Account SEO. First, we need to understand a concept: keywords. Everyone has used Baidu or Xiaohongshu (Little Red Book), and we often search for questions like: how to make braised pork, what to do if your dog has a cold, what to eat to nourish the kidneys, etc. These questions are called keywords. Some keywords aren't just searched by you; many other people will search for them on the same day. If 10,000 people search for a certain word on the same day, then the index for that keyword is 10,000.

For example, on Xiaohongshu, 10,000 people search for "makeup steps" every day, so the index for the keyword "makeup steps" is 10,000. If you post a video that happens to contain the words "makeup steps" and it happens to rank first, then your video's daily readership will be around 10,000.

How do we find out the index for a keyword? We can search for "WeChat Index" on WeChat to find the "WeChat Index" mini-program.

Then, enter the corresponding keyword to find out the keyword's popularity within the entire WeChat ecosystem. For example, let's look at the index for the keyword "snack recipes."

The keyword "snack recipe" has an index of 2.22 million. However, the WeChat index doesn't represent all searches; it also includes content viewed by users containing the keyword "snack recipe." How do we determine how many people search for this term daily? Look at the bottom; there's a source analysis chart. From this chart, we can determine the specific search volume.

As shown in the chart, the proportion from WeChat's search engine is 0.14%. Therefore, 2.22 million × 0.14% = 3108. This means that over 3100 people search for "snack recipe" on WeChat every day.

If you're too lazy to find all these keywords individually or analyze their index, and just want a simple, direct approach, what can you do? It's simple: search for the first few characters of the keyword on WeChat. Let's start by searching for any word in a search engine, as shown in the image below:

Then, in the search box above, search for the first few characters of any keyword related to your industry, as shown in the image below:

As you can see, before you even finished typing, many related words appeared below. You don't need to search these words directly; they all have search volume. Save them all; you can use them in the titles when writing for your WeChat official account later. These are words that naturally attract traffic.

Organize these words in a document. Later, we can add these keywords to our titles. Once these words are added, our content will receive organic traffic once it's indexed, regardless of its ranking. All we need to do is improve our ranking, because the higher the ranking, the greater the organic traffic.

So, let's talk about how to write titles. The simplest way is to use: keywords + a pain point to solve.

For example: How to choose a durian? Pay attention to these 3 parts, and you'll definitely get plenty of flesh!

In this title, "How to Choose a Durian" is a keyword, and the second half addresses a pain point, making it a very attractive title. Let's take another example: "What to do about a toothache in the middle of the night? These 4 methods will relieve your pain in 3 seconds!" In this sentence, you should understand where the keyword is and where the pain point is addressed, right? Yes, that's how we write our titles.

After mastering title writing, we need to optimize the article itself. Why do some articles rank first, some second, and some 50th, even though they are the same type of article? See the image below:

There are three reasons:

1. The title keyword and the search keyword have a close match. Look at the keywords we searched for; aren't they very similar to the keywords in the title of the top-ranking article? They just don't completely overlap. If you also wrote an article with "How to Choose a Durian" in the title, you might rank first.

2. Keyword density. This is extremely important. Even Baidu SEO highly values ​​keyword density. Simply put, it's the frequency of a particular keyword appearing in your article. The higher the frequency of a keyword, the more authoritative the system considers your article, resulting in a higher ranking.

3. Account Verticality. If your public account usually updates furniture-related content, and suddenly you post an article on "How to Choose a Durian," your ranking will be lower than someone who specifically writes about fruits and durians. This is because the latter's account is vertical, and their content already attracts clicks from their followers. Each click brings extra weight, so the higher the verticality of the account, the higher the article ranking.

Having read this far, many of you are probably eager to try it out and already know roughly how to optimize your public account articles for a good ranking. Here's a simple summary of the steps:

1. First, find all your industry keywords, preferably those with search volume.

2. When writing the title, incorporate the keywords you found beforehand into your title.

3. Include this keyword multiple times in the article. If you're unsure where to place it, simply paste the title multiple times within the article. See the image below:

4. Continuously update your account with vertical content.

By doing these four things, your WeChat Official Account's overall article ranking will be very high. When a large number of articles contain keywords, especially those with search volume, the organic search volume generated by those keywords alone will be enough to make you financially secure, even if you do nothing else every day!

Okay, today's sharing isn't about a specific project, but rather a very important piece of knowledge. Learning this knowledge will allow you to apply it to various fields in the future and will bring you knowledge more valuable than money. If you understand and have learned today's knowledge, you can reply below: "Learned WeChat Official Account SEO Matrix Traffic Generation + Passive Income!"

Thank you everyone, sharing complete.
鱼儿从小就是一个顽皮的孩子，她从不像别的孩子那样安静。她喜欢在水里蹿来蹿去，先是个50米冲刺，然后来一个急刹车或是一个急转弯。每每这时，水儿总是微笑地看着鱼儿……白天，水儿把鱼儿轻轻抛起，让她跃出水面，看看外面的世界，然后再将她稳稳地接住。到了夜里，水儿就成了最温暖的摇篮，他总是轻轻地摇晃，哄着鱼儿让她入睡。

　　Fish says to Water: I am crying all the time, but you never know, because I'm in the water.

　　鱼对水说：我整天哭泣，不过你看不见我的眼泪，因为我在水中。

　　Water says: I know, because you are in my heart all the time.

　　水对鱼说;我能感觉到你的眼泪，因为你在我心中。

　　Fish says to Water: I will never leave you, because I can't live without you.

　　鱼对水说：我永远不会离开你，因为离开你，我无法生存。

　　Water says: I know, but if your heart is missing?

　　水对鱼说：我知道，可是如果你的心不在呢?

　　Fish says to Water: I'm so lonely, because I only can live in the water.

　　鱼对水说：我很寂寞，因为我只能待在水中。

　　Water says: I know, because your loneliness is in my heart.

　　水对鱼说：我知道，因为我的心里装着你的寂寞。

　　Fish says to Water: If there is not the fish in the water, then what is else left here?

　　鱼对水说：如果没有鱼，那水里还会剩下什么?

　　Water says: If you were not here, then how I was?

　　水对鱼说：如果没有你，那又怎么会有我?

　　I'm not the fish, you are not the water. I will still living very well without your love.

　　我不是鱼，你也不是水。没有你的爱，我依然会好好的活。

　　But, living very well does not mean forget.可是，好好的活并不代表我可以把你忘记。

　　Fish says to Water: I cant go outside to see the world is the biggest regret in my life.

　　鱼对水说：一辈子不能出去看看外面的世界，是我最大的遗憾。

　　Water says: I can't let you give up this idea is my biggest defeat in my life.

　　水对鱼说：一辈子不能打消你的这个念头，是我最大的失败。

　　I'm not the fish, you are not the water. Now I just want a promise for a whole life.

　　我不是鱼，你也不是水。现在的我只想要一个一辈子的承诺。

　　But, can you　burden it?

　　可是，你负担得起吗?

　　Fish says to Water: Am I the first fish in your whole life?

　　鱼对水说：在你的一生中，我是第几条鱼?

　　Water says: you are not the first fish in the water, but you are the first fish in my heart.

　　水对鱼说：你不是在水中的第一条鱼，但却是在我心中的第一条。

　　Fish says to Water: Can you believe fall in love at first sight?

　　鱼对水说：你相信一见钟情吗?

　　Water says: The moment when I wake up to you are a fish, I already knew you will swim to my heart.

　　水对鱼说：当我意识到你是鱼的那一刻，就知道你会游到我的心里。

　　Fish says to Water: Why do I ask and you answer every time?

　　鱼对水说：为什么每次都是我问你答?

　　Water says: Because I like that you understand my heart during the　interlocution.

　　水对鱼说：因为我喜欢在问答中让你了解我的心。

　　I'm not the fish, you are not the water. Why you always let me wait?

　　我不是鱼，你也不是水。为什么你总是让我等待?

　　Don't you know, Wait=Lost belief=Give up?

　　难道你不知道，等待=失去信心=放弃。

　　If I'm the fish, you are the water, how nice that is?

　　如果我是鱼，而你是水，那该多好!

　　The water always know the fish's idea, because the fish in the heart of the water.

　　水永远都知道鱼的想法，因为鱼在水心里。

　　But I'm not the fish, you are not the water.

　　但是我不是鱼，你也不是水。

　　You never know my love, maybe I'm not in your heart at all.

　　你永远都不知道我的爱，因为我也许根本就不在你的心里……

　　If I'm the fish, you are the water.

　　如果我是鱼，你就是水。

　　Can I swim to your heart......

　　我可以游进你的心里吗……
Napoleon to Josephine

　　I have your letter, my adorable love. It has filled my heart with joy...since I left you I have been sad all the time. My only happiness is near you. I go over endlessly in my thought your kisses, your tears, your delicious jealousy. The charm of my wonderful Josephine kindles a living, blazing fire in my heart and senses.

　　我收到了你的信，我崇拜的心上人。 你的信使我充满了欢乐…自我与你分手之后，我一直闷闷不乐，愁眉不展。我唯一的幸福就是伴随着你。 你的吻给了我无限的思索和回味，还有你的泪水和甜蜜的嫉妒。 我迷人的约瑟芬的魅力像一团炽热的火在我的心里燃烧。

　　When shall I be able to pass every minute near you, with nothing to do but to love you and nothing to think of but the pleasure of telling you of it and giving you proof of it? I have loved you some time ago; since then I feel that I love you a thousand times better. Ever since I have known you I adore you more every day. That proves how wrong is that saying of La Bruyere "Love comes all of a sudden."

　　什么时候我才能在你身旁度过每分每刻， 除了爱你什么也不做;除了爱你，除了向你倾诉我对你的爱并向你证明我对你的爱的那种愉快，我什么也不想了。我不敢相信不久前爱过你，自那以后我感到对你的爱更增一千倍。 自与你相识，我一天比一天更崇拜你。 这正好证明了LaBruyere 说的“爱，突如其来”多么不切合实际。

　　Ah, let me see some of your faults; be less beautiful, Less graceful, less tender, less good. But never be jealous and never shed tears. Your tears send me out of my mind they set my very blood on fire. Believe me that it is utterly impossible for me to have a single thought that is not yours, a single fancy that is not submissive to your will. Rest well. Restore your health. Come back to me and then at any rate before we die we ought to be able to say:"We were happy for so very many days!" Millions of kisses even to your dog.

　　唉，让我来看你的一些美中不足吧。 让你再少几分甜美、再少几分温柔、再少几分妩媚、再少几分姣好吧。 但决不要嫉妒，决不要流泪。 你的眼泪使我神魂颠倒，你的眼泪使我热血沸腾。相信我，我每分每刻都想着你，绵绵的思念全是因为你。所有的意愿都顺从你。 好好休息，早日康复。 回到我的身边，不管怎么说，在我们谢世之前，我们应当能说：“我们曾有多少个幸福的日子啊!”我给你千百万次的吻，还吻你的爱犬。
这是一封细致入微的家书，非常感人，美国前总统奥巴马写给女儿的信亲切、自然、朴实、没有大话、套话，说的全是家常，每一条建议都可以做得到，每一条都有益，行文的语气没有作为父亲或者总统的谆谆教导，从"不在外面吃饭"这类小事，到"这个世界是一个完全由大家分享的世界，你所做的每件事都会影响到别人"这类普世价值观，奥巴马都说得贴切，自然，优美。

　　希望能够对你有所裨益。

　　Life is short. It may feel like it takes　forever sometimes, but the reality is that you live, and a short time later, you die. It happens so quickly, many people don’t even realize they had a life until it’s already over.

　　生命如此短暂。我们有时候觉得生命怎么也走不完，实际上，你现在活着，过不了多久，就会死去。人生真是转眼一瞬间的事情，很多人到临死前才意识到这一生已经结束。

　　一

　　停止怀疑自己

　　Stop Doubting Yourself

　　If you don’t believe in yourself, nobody　will. Success starts in your mind, and if all you’re doing is putting yourself　down and predicting failure, it’ll become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Instead of doubting yourself, think positively. Not only will you be happier and more　successful, you’ll spread it to everyone around you.

　　如果你自己都不相信自己，那没人会相信你。成功源于你的头脑，如果你所做的是不断地看扁自己，预言着未来的失败，这就真的会成为现实。与其怀疑自己，不如积极的考虑问题。不仅会让自己更加开心和成功，你还能够感染到周围的人。

　　二

　　停止消极

　　Stop Being Negative

　　Now that you’re done doubting yourself, stop doubting others. You don’t like when people are critical of you, so stop being critical of others. Think about how you make other people feel – even if you have good intentions, people don’t like hearing negativity.

　　现在你不要再怀疑自己了，也别再怀疑身边的人。你不希望被人对你挑剔，那么也不要再去挑剔身边的人。想想你给别人带来的什么样的感受吧——即使出发点是好的，别人也不想听到那么多消极的事情呀。

　　三

　　停止拖延

　　Stop Procrastinating

　　I don’t feel like procrastinating right now– I’ll do it tomorrow. When you procrastinate, you remain stagnant. Whatever you’re putting off doesn’t go away; resolve the problem, and move on. You’ll be much happier in the long run.

　　我现在不想做，还是留到明天吧。一旦开始拖延，其实你已经停滞不前了。你拖延的事情不会自行解决。解决问题，继续前行吧。从长远角度来说你会更加快乐。

　　四

　　不要那么刻薄

　　Stop Being Mean

　　It’s completely possible to step on　someone’s toes without meaning to – it happens all the time. There’s no need to pile on by purposefully doing mean things, so make a conscious effort to stop being mean. If someone wrongs you, let it go. There’s no need to seek vengeance unless that’s the type of person you want to be.

　　无意踩到别人的情况真的有可能会发生——常常会发生。但没必要去处心积虑地做一些不好的事情，所以要有意识地让自己不要那么刻薄。如果有人对你无理地对待，随他们去好了。没必要去报复，除非你也想成为那一类的人。

　　五

　　不要在外吃饭

　　Stop Eating Out

　　Eating out is the biggest waste of money. Every so often it’s nice to treat yourself, but eating out for every meal is the quickest way to drain your bank account. Learn how to cook at least a handful of foods you enjoy: It’ll save you money, keep you healthier, and occasionally impress people.

　　在外面吃饭真的非常非常的浪费钱。也许每次对于你而言都是一次犒赏，但每顿都在外面吃反而是花光积蓄的最快方式。至少也去学学怎么做一些自己喜欢的菜：既能省钱，还能让你更健康，还会让其他人眼前一亮。

　　六

　　不要再偷懒

　　Stop Being Lazy

　　Lazy people are annoying – it’s like pulling teeth getting them to do anything. If I can’t do something as simple as going to a movie with you without having to factor in an hour of convincing you to get your lazy butt out of bed, I’d rather go alone. People have enough trouble motivating themselves; don’t make your friends and family waste their valuable energy motivating you as well.

　　懒人真的很招人烦——得像赶驴磨墨一样逼着他们做事情。如果我想跟你看一场电影，却不得不花一个小时说服你起床，那我宁愿一个人去看。给自己动力都不是件容易的事情，就别让朋友和家人浪费宝贵的精力再来给你动力了吧。

　　七

　　停止抱怨

　　Stop Complaining

　　We all have problems, and sometimes we need to vent to someone. That’s acceptable, but pay attention to how often you’re venting. We all love helping our friends and family, but when all you get from someone is negativity, it’s easier to cut them off than help, especially if they’re always complaining about the same things.

　　我们都有麻烦事，有时候总想跟别人倾诉。这可以理解，但要注意你吐槽的频率。我们都喜欢帮助朋友和家人，但如果从那个人身上我只能感知到负能量，那么还是离得越远越好吧，尤其是当他们在反复抱怨同一件事的时候。

　　八

　　别再那么自私

　　Stop Being Selfish

　　If you only think about yourself, you’ll soon find yourself by yourself. Stop for a minute and think about how your actions affect other people – did you take the last cup of coffee from the break room? Refill it! Do you live with others? Don’t drink out the milk carton. We share this world 100% of the time, so every action you take can affect other people.

　　如果你只考虑你自己，那么很快你会发现身边只剩下你自己。停一分钟想想你的行为会给别人带来什么影响吧——你是不是从休息室拿了最后一杯咖啡?再倒满呀!你是不是和别人合租?不要喝光所有的牛奶，这个世界是一个完全由大家分享的世界，你所做的每件事都会影响到别人。

　　九

　　别再浪费时间

　　Stop Wasting Time

　　If you only think about yourself, you’ll soon find yourself by yourself. Stop for a minute and think about how your actions affect other people – did you take the last cup of coffee from the break room? Refill it! Do you live with others? Don’t drink out the milk carton. We share this world 100% of the time, so every action you take can affect other people.

　　如果你只考虑你自己，那么很快你会发现身边只剩下你自己。停一分钟想想你的行为会给别人带来什么影响吧——你是不是从休息室拿了最后一杯咖啡?再倒满呀!你是不是和别人合租?不要喝光所有的牛奶，这个世界是一个完全由大家分享的世界，你所做的每件事都会影响到别人。

　　十

　　别再做承诺

　　Stop Making Promises

　　Always under-promise and over-deliver. When you make a promise, you’re adding responsibility to your plate that, despite all your best intentions, you may not be able to deliver on. More often than not, your promise is an absolute (i.e. “I promise I’ll always love you”)， and only Sith deal in absolutes. Instead of making a promise with your words, simply be there when people need you, and exceed their expectations with your actions.

　　总是做承诺，总是做不到。每次做承诺都是不禁给自己增添了责任，无论你的出发点有多好，你都不可能完成所有的部分。大部分时候，你的承诺都太过绝对(比如“我发誓我永远爱你”)，也只能在绝对环境中才能实现。与其用语言许下承诺，不如在别人需要你的时候出现，然后用行动达到他们的期望吧。

　　十一

　　停止软弱

　　Stop Being a Pushover

　　We live in a capitalistic society in which everyone’s trying to sell us something. Everyone’s looking out for themselves in one way or another, and you need to do the same. Stop putting yourself out because you’re too shy to say no.

　　我们处于一个资本主义社会，每个人都在试图向我们推销些什么。每个人都在用不同的方式关注自己，你也要这样做。别因为太害羞、不敢说“不”而任人摆布。

　　十二

　　不要听怀恨者的话

　　Stop Listening to Haters

　　No matter what you want to do in life, there’s always someone around to tell you why it can’t and won’t work. I can come up with millions of reasons Twitter won’t work, and yet it’s one of the most popular social media sites on the web. My opinion didn’t stop Twitter’s success any more than it convinced Kobe Bryant to quit the NBA or Josh Hartnett to stop acting. Why would you let someone’s opinion stop you?

　　无论你想干什么，总会有人告诉你不要这么做，没有用的。我可以想出成百万条推特不实用的理由，但它还是互联网上最流行的社交网站之一。我的想法不会阻止推特的成功，就像你无法劝科比退出NBA或乔什·哈奈特不要当演员了一样，都毫无意义。那么为什么要让别人的想法阻止你呢?

　　十三

　　停止浪费

　　Stop Being Wasteful

　　You don’t finish your meals, and away food instead. You leave the faucet running when you brush your teeth, pouring precious water down the drain. You drive places you could easily walk, burning gasoline (a non-renewable resource)。 You are wasteful, and it needs to stop.

　　你饭没吃完，然后扔掉食物;刷牙的时候还开着水龙头，就让宝贵的水哗哗的流走;明明可以走到的地方你偏要开车，燃烧汽油(无法再生资源)。如果你浪费了，那就赶紧停止这一恶习。

　　十四

　　不要乱扔垃圾

　　Stop Littering

　　The only thing I hate more than wasteful people are litterbugs. Litterbugs are my least favorite bug, and there are more than you’d think. If you’ve ever thrown even one piece of gum, paper, candy wrapper, cigarette butt, etc on the ground, you’re a disgusting litterbug, and you should be ashamed of yourself. There are over 7 billion people in the world– if each person only throws one “innocent” piece of garbage on the ground, that’s 7 billion pieces of garbage littering a world in which nobody “did it”。

　　唯一一个让我觉得比浪费的人更可恶的就是垃圾虫。垃圾虫最让我厌恶，而且数量比你想的多很多。如果你曾扔过一块口香糖、一张纸、糖果包装、烟蒂，那么你就是恶心的垃圾虫。你应该感到羞愧。世界上有超过70亿的人——如果每个人都“无辜的”扔一点垃圾，那么全世界就会变成70亿垃圾场，而找不到“罪魁祸首”。

　　十五

　　别把每件事太往心里去

　　Stop Taking Everything Personally

　　People get offended about the strangest things. Take Kendrick Lamar’s now-infamous verse on “Control” this summer: he called out a list of a dozen rappers he thinks he’s better than (and he’s right)。 The internet went crazy, and rappers all over the industry rushed to their Mics to record a response. The thing is, all K-Dot said is he’s the best rapper. Everyone took it personally, and that’s exactly what he was going for. The lesson to learn from this is that not everything is about you, and if you’re easily upset, someone will use that to their advantage.

　　人们会因为一些奇怪的事情感到被侵犯。就拿Kendrick Lamar这个夏天备受争议的歌曲《Control》为例：他在歌词中挑衅了一些他认为比他弱的说唱歌手(的确是这样)，一石激起千层浪，整个说唱界的歌手都蜂拥录歌作为回击。重点在于，所有的人都认为自己是最好的说唱者，每个人都更看重自己，这就是他的目的所在。这件事教给我们的无非就是不是所有的事都要围着你转，如果你是玻璃心，有人会利用这一点。

　　十六

　　不要再说话了

　　Stop Talking

　　Sometimes it’s best to just STFU –especially in relationships. I can’t even count how many times I created an issue that didn’t need to be an issue simply because I opened my mouth. Even if what you want to say is important, just shut up and ride it out. You can say more with your actions than words, and you can’t listen when you’re talking.

　　有时候沉默是金——特别在情侣关系里。我都记不清到底多少次因为说错话引发了本可以避免的争端。即使你想说的非常重要，那也闭嘴，自行消化。你可以用行动证明一切，毕竟你自己说话的时候是听不见的。

　　十七

　　停一下，深呼吸吧

　　Just Stop, and Breathe…

　　No matter what you’re doing in life or how your day is going, there’s always room to just stop for a moment and just breathe. Try it right now to celebrate getting through this list of everything you’re doing wrong.

　　无论你现在在干什么，这一天过得怎么样，你都需要好好停一下深呼吸。不如现在就歇一歇，犒赏自己总算挺过了一些错事。
Quora上有网友问： I have read lots of books but forgotten most of them. What's the purpose of reading?

　　我虽然读了很多书，但是都忘了内容讲的是什么了，那么问题来了，读书的意义何在呢?

　　Answered by Katekonda Surya Prakash

　　Katekonda Surya Prakash 回复说：

　　An old farmer lived on a farm in the mountains with his young grandson. Each morning grandpa was up early sitting at the kitchen table reading his holy book. One day the grandson asked, "grandpa! I try to read the holy book just like you but I don't understand it, and what I do understand I forget as soon as I close the book. What good does reading the book do?"

　　从前，有一位老农和他的小孙子住在山间的农场里。每天早上，老人都会早早起床，坐在厨房桌子上读圣书。一天，他的孙子问道：“爷爷!我努力尝试像您一样读圣书，可我看不大懂，而那些能看懂的部分，一合上书我又给忘了。那我读这本书有什么用呢?”

　　The grandfather quietly turned from putting coal in the stove and replied, "take this coal basket down to the river and bring me back a basket of water."

　　老人正在给炉子添煤，这会儿平静地停下手中的动作，答道：“带着这个煤篮子到河边去，给我打一篮水回来吧。”

　　The boy did as he was told, but all the water leaked out before he got back to the house. The grandfather laughed and said, "you'll have to move a little faster next time", and sent him back to the river with the basket to try again. This time the boy ran faster, but again the basket was empty before he returned home. Out of breath, he told his grandfather that it was impossible to carry water in a basket, and he went to get a bucket instead. The old man said, "I don't want a bucket of water; I want a basket of water. You're just not trying hard enough," and he went out the door to watch the boy try again. At this point, the boy knew it was impossible, but he wanted to show his grandfather that even if he ran as fast as he could, the water would leak out before he got back to the house. The boy again dipped the basket into the river and ran hard, but when he reached his grandfather the basket was again empty. Out of breath, he said, "see grandpa, it's useless!"

　　男孩便照做，可还没等他回到家，篮子里的水就都漏光了。老农夫笑道：“你下次得跑快点。”说完便又让他提着篮子回去。这一次，男孩跑得更快了，但半路上篮子里的水又漏光了。他喘着气告诉老农夫用篮子提水是不可能的，他要去换成桶。老人说：“我不要一桶水，我要的是一篮水。你只是没有尽全力罢了。”说完便出门想看着男孩再试一次。这回，男孩心里已经清楚这是不可能的，但为了向祖父证明即便自己竭尽全力地跑，水还是会在他没到家前就流光，便再一次把篮子浸到河里装水，提起后飞奔往回跑。不出所料，当他来到祖父面前时，篮子又一次空了。他气喘吁吁地说：“看吧，爷爷，根本没用!”

　　"So you think it is useless?" The old man said, "look at the basket." The boy looked at the basket and for the first time realized that the basket was different. It had been transformed from a dirty old coal basket and was now clean, inside and out.

　　“所以你觉得没用?”老人说，“你再看看篮子。”男孩看了看篮子，这时，他突然意识到篮子已经变得不一样了：本来又脏又旧的煤篮如今竟由内而外都变得干净如新。

　　So, that's what happens when you read the book. You might not understand or remember everything, but when you read it, you will be changed, inside and out!!!

　　读书也是如此。或许你无法理解或记住所有东西，然而，当你在读它们的时候，它们已经由内而外地改变了你!

　　This story above uses a holy book as example, but applies to any book you read!!

　　这个故事以圣书为例，但其中的道理适用于你读的每一本书。
Our tolerating ability is indeed may beyond our imagination. But not until the very critical moment will we realize our potential tolerating ability.

　　人的承受能力，其实远远超过我们的想象，就像不到关键时刻，我们很少能认识到自己的潜力有多大。

　　There was a woman in the countryside who got married at the age of 18 and had to escape with her two daughters and a son wherever she could at the age of 26 due to the Japanese army’s invasion. Many people in the village at that time could not bear the suffering of being a fugitive and wanted to commit suicide. After she knew about it, she would come to those people and soothed them by saying: “Don’t do that silly thing. There are no such setbacks that we could not overcome. The Japanese armies are bound to be foiled one day!”

　　有这样一位农村妇女，她18岁的时候结婚，26岁赶上日本人侵略中国，在农村进行大扫荡，她不得不经常带着两个女儿一个儿子东躲西藏。村里很多人受不了这种暗无天日的折磨，想到了自尽，她得知后就会去劝：“别这样啊，没有过不去的坎，日本鬼子不会总这么猖狂的。”

　　Finally she insisted until the day when all the Japanese armies were kicked out of China. Nonetheless, her son died of disease without sufficient medicine and nutrition in those days of hardships. Her husband, after knowing the death of his son, lay in bed for two days without eating and drinking anything. She teared to her husband and said, “We have a tough destiny, but however tough our lives will be, we should also persist. Though our son has passed away, we can have another. There are no such setbacks that we could not overcome.”

　　她终于熬到了把鬼子赶出中国的那一天，可是她的儿子却在那炮火连天的岁月里，由于缺医少药，又极度缺乏营养，因病夭折了。丈夫不吃不喝在床上躺了两天两 夜，她流着泪对丈夫说：“咱们的命苦啊，不过再苦咱也得过啊，儿子没了，咱再生一个，人生没有过不去的坎。”

　　After giving birth to the second son, her husband died of edema, which almost blew her away. But eventually, she recovered and cuddled the three young children, saying, “My sweet hearts, don’t feel scared. You still have me, your dear mum!”

　　刚刚生了儿子，丈夫因患水肿病离开了人世。在这个打击下，她很长时间都没回过神来，但最后还是挺过来了，她把三个未成年的孩子揽到自己怀里，说：“娘还在呢，有娘在，你们就别怕。”

　　It took her painstaking efforts to raise her children up and the life of her family was getting better and better. Two daughters were married and so was his son finally. She said to everyone she met, “Look! What I said is absolutely right. There are no such setbacks that we could not overcome! My life is so happy now!” She was aging gradually and could not do the farm work any more. So she stayed at home and did some stitching work.

　　她含辛茹苦地把孩子一个个拉扯大了，生活也慢慢好转起来。两个女儿嫁了人，儿子也结了婚。她逢人便乐呵呵地说：“我说吧，没有过不去的坎，现在生活多好啊。”她年纪大了，不能下地干活，就在家纳鞋底，做衣服，缝缝补补。

　　Nevertheless, the Heaven seemed to show no affection to her who had undergone a rough life. She got her leg broken accidentally when she was nursing her grandson. Due to her old age that posed a great risk to her operation, she did not receive operation and had to lie in bed all day long. Her children all cried heavily, while she merely said,“Why do you cry? I am still living.”

　　可是，上苍似乎并不眷顾这位一生坎坷的妇女，她在照看孙子时不小心摔断了腿，由于年纪太大做手术危险，就一直没有做手术，她每天只能躺在床上。儿女们都哭了，她却说：“哭什么，我还活着呢。”

　　Even though she could not rise from bed, she did not complain about anything and anybody. Instead, she sat on the bed and did some stitching work. She had learnt scarves-weaving, broidery, crafts-making, etc. All her neighbors spoke highly of her skills and came to learn from her.

　　即便下不了床，她也没有怨天尤人，而是坐在床上做针线活。她会织围巾，会绣花，会编手工艺品，左邻右舍的人都夸她手艺好，还来跟她学艺。

　　She lived until 86. Before she went to Heaven, she said to her children, “You all should live to your best. There are no such setbacks that we could not overcome!”

　　她活到86岁，临终前，她对自己儿女们说：“都要好好过啊，没有过不去的坎。”

　　We will only get to realize our own iron will and strong tolerating ability after getting stricken heavily. Therefore, no matter what you are suffering from now, do not merely complain about the unfairness of our destiny and maintain low-spirited all the time. There are no such setbacks that we could not overcome. Only those who have no confidence and courage to overcome setbacks will be defeated at last!

　　人总是在遭遇一次重创之后，才会幡然醒悟，重新认识自己的坚强和坚忍。所以，无论你正在遭遇什么磨难，都不要一味抱怨上苍不公平，甚至从此一蹶不振。人生没有过不去的坎，只有过不去的人。
A true friend is someone who reaches for your hand and touches your heart.

　　真正的朋友是一个可以援手帮助并感动你心扉的人。

　　There's always going to be people that hurt you,so what you have to do is keep on trusting and just be more careful about who you trust next time around.

　　别人常常伤害你，所以你该继续付出信任，并小心挑选你下次信任的人。

　　Make youself a better person and know who you are before you try and know someone else and expect them to know you.

　　在你想了解别人也想让别人了解你之前，先完善并了解自己。

　　Remember:Whatever happens,happens for a reason.

　　要记住：任何事情的发生都有因有起。

　　How many people actually have 8 true friends?Hardly anyone I know.But some of us have all right friends and good friends.

　　有多少人可以拥有八个真正的朋友?就我所知少之又少。但我们会有泛泛之交和好友。
在人类漫长的历史长河里，每一次文明的跃进都伴随着对光的重新发现与驾驭。从远古先民仰望星空时对日月星辰的神化崇拜，到古希腊哲学家为光赋予理性的几何形态；从中世纪教堂彩绘玻璃窗后那些象征着神圣启示的斑斓光晕，到文艺复兴时期艺术家们在画布上捕捉到的、充满人文气息的微妙光影；从牛顿用三棱镜揭示白光奥秘的那个决定性瞬间，到麦克斯韦用一组优美方程统一电磁世界的壮丽图景，人类对光的理解，始终是一场在理性与诗意之间、在测量与想象之间的壮阔远征。十九世纪末，当经典物理学大厦在以太的阴影下看似坚不可摧时，正是那关于光速的、幽灵般的常数，成为了撬动整个知识体系的阿基米德支点。爱因斯坦以其革命性的洞察，将光从一种需要传播介质的“波动”，提升为宇宙时空结构本身固有且不可逾越的速率极限，从而彻底重塑了我们对时间、空间、物质与能量之间关系的根本认知。相对论所预言的光线弯曲，不仅被爱丁顿的日食观测所证实，更像一道真正的光芒，照亮了现代宇宙学的道路，让我们得以窥见黑洞的视界、引力波的涟漪以及宇宙膨胀的恢弘序曲。而几乎在同一时期，从黑体辐射那令人困惑的“紫外灾难”中诞生的量子观念，进一步将光的神秘性推向了顶点。光究竟是波还是粒子？这个古老的难题在量子力学的语境下获得了崭新的、反直觉的解答：波粒二象性。光子，这个能量与信息的终极信使，成为了量子纠缠、量子通信与量子计算这些前沿领域的绝对主角，预示着一次可能比蒸汽机或半导体更为深刻的技术革命。与此同时，在工程与技术的疆域，对光的驾驭也从未停止。从蔡司与肖特在光学玻璃上的精益求精，到激光器那束极度纯净、强大而可控的人造光芒的诞生；从依靠透镜与棱镜的经典光学仪器，到以计算和衍射为核心、能够透视细胞内部甚至窥探系外行星的现代计算光学成像，我们操控光的能力，已然成为衡量一个时代科技水准的隐秘标尺。光纤中近乎光速奔腾的数据洪流，构成了全球化数字文明的神经中枢；而自适应光学技术则让地面上的望远镜得以穿透大气湍流的帷幕，使人类的视线触及宇宙最深邃的边缘。此刻，站在二十一世纪第三个十年的门槛上，我们正目睹着光学领域新一轮的范式融合与爆发。超构表面与变换光学正在重新定义“透镜”与“成像”的边界，让隐身衣与超分辨率显微不再仅仅是科幻畅想。量子光学与光量子信息的结合，正在为绝对安全的通信和超越经典极限的计算能力铺平道路。对光的理解与操控，已不仅仅是物理学家或工程师的专有领域，它更深度地融合了材料科学、信息技术、生命科学乃至艺术与哲学，成为驱动整体人类知识进步与生存境遇变革的一束核心光源。这束光，既照亮了微观粒子幽暗的轨迹，也勾勒出星系长城宏伟的轮廓；既在光纤中传递着亿万人的低声细语与宏大声明，也在手术刀尖化为修复生命的精密能量。对光的永恒追问与不懈探索，本质上，是人类对存在之本质、对知识之边界、对自身在宇宙中位置的一场永不落幕的伟大朝圣。
Throughout human history, every leap forward in civilization has been accompanied by the rediscovery and mastery of light. From the ancient people's deified worship of the sun, moon, and stars as they gazed at the night sky, to the ancient Greek philosophers who gave light a rational geometric form; from the colorful halos symbolizing divine revelation behind the stained-glass windows of medieval churches, to the subtle light and shadow captured on canvas by Renaissance artists, full of humanistic spirit; from Newton's decisive moment in revealing the mystery of white light with a prism, to Maxwell's magnificent vision of unifying the electromagnetic world with a set of elegant equations, humanity's understanding of light has always been a grand expedition between reason and poetry, between measurement and imagination. At the end of the nineteenth century, when the edifice of classical physics seemed indestructible under the shadow of the ether, it was that ghostly constant about the speed of light that became the Archimedes' fulcrum, leveraging the entire system of knowledge. With his revolutionary insight, Einstein elevated light from a "wave" requiring a medium to propagate to an inherent and insurmountable speed limit of the spacetime structure itself, thus fundamentally reshaping our understanding of the relationship between time, space, matter, and energy. The bending of light predicted by relativity was not only confirmed by Eddington's eclipse observations but also acted as a true ray of light, illuminating the path of modern cosmology and allowing us to glimpse the event horizon of black holes, the ripples of gravitational waves, and the grand prelude to the expansion of the universe. Around the same time, the quantum concept, born from the perplexing "ultraviolet catastrophe" of blackbody radiation, further pushed the mystery of light to its peak. Is light a wave or a particle? This ancient question received a new, counterintuitive answer in the context of quantum mechanics: wave-particle duality. The photon, the ultimate messenger of energy and information, has become the absolute protagonist in cutting-edge fields such as quantum entanglement, quantum communication, and quantum computing, foreshadowing a technological revolution that may be even more profound than the steam engine or semiconductors. Meanwhile, in the realm of engineering and technology, the mastery of light has never ceased. From Zeiss and Schott's relentless pursuit of excellence in optical glass to the birth of the laser—an extremely pure, powerful, and controllable artificial beam of light; from classical optical instruments relying on lenses and prisms to modern computational optics imaging, centered on computation and diffraction, capable of penetrating the interior of cells and even observing exoplanets, our ability to manipulate light has become a hidden yardstick for measuring the technological level of an era. The near-light-speed torrent of data in optical fibers constitutes the nerve center of global digital civilization; while adaptive optics technology allows ground-based telescopes to penetrate the veil of atmospheric turbulence, enabling humanity's vision to reach the deepest edges of the universe. Now, standing at the threshold of the third decade of the 21st century, we are witnessing a new round of paradigm convergence and explosion in the field of optics. Metasurfaces and transformation optics are redefining the boundaries between "lens" and "imaging," making invisibility cloaks and super-resolution microscopy no longer just science fiction. The combination of quantum optics and quantum information is paving the way for absolutely secure communication and computational capabilities that surpass classical limits. The understanding and manipulation of light is no longer solely the domain of physicists or engineers; it has deeply integrated materials science, information technology, life sciences, and even art and philosophy, becoming a core source of light driving the overall progress of human knowledge and the transformation of our living conditions. This light illuminates the dim paths of microscopic particles and outlines the magnificent contours of galaxies; it transmits the whispers and grand pronouncements of billions of people in optical fibers and transforms into the precise energy needed to heal life at the tip of a scalpel. The eternal questioning and relentless exploration of light is, in essence, a never-ending, grand pilgrimage of humanity to the essence of existence, the boundaries of knowledge, and its own place in the universe.
在文明的深层脉络中，对工具的使用与创造始终是人类区别于其他生命形态的根本标志，也是驱动历史车轮向前滚动的隐形齿轮。从旧石器时代人类第一次有意识地将燧石敲击出锋利的边缘，到新石器时代对陶土与火共舞的驯服；从青铜器上凝结的早期化学智慧与权力图腾，到铁器时代犁铧翻开封建社会的土壤与刀剑重绘欧亚大陆的政治地图；工具的发展史便是一部浓缩的人类心智进化史与社会组织变迁史。然而，真正将这一进程从线性累积推向指数级爆发的，无疑是蒸汽机那一声划时代的轰鸣。它不仅是物理意义上的动力革命，将热能转化为机械能，更是深刻的社会哲学革命：它宣告人类不再完全依赖肌肉（无论是人还是牲畜）、风力与水力这些变幻无常的自然馈赠，而是首次掌握了持续、可控且强大的自主动力源。工厂的烟囱取代了乡村的炊烟，火车与轮船压缩了时空的距离，标准化生产重塑了劳动与生活的节奏。紧随其后的电力时代，则进一步将能量转化为一种近乎无形、即刻可达、易于分割与控制的形式。电灯驱散了自然的黑夜，电报与电话让信息首次以光速传播，电动机赋予机器以灵活的生命。如果说蒸汽动力塑造了工业城市的骨骼与肌肉，那么电力则为其注入了敏感的神经系统与不眠的活力。
而二十世纪中叶至今，我们正生活在一场或许更为深刻的“控制论-信息革命”之中。这场革命的起点，可以追溯到图灵对“可计算性”的抽象思考，以及香农将信息从具体的意义中剥离、赋予其数学度量的伟大洞察。晶体管与集成电路的发明，使得信息的处理（计算）与存储发生了本质性飞跃。计算机不再仅仅是高速的计算器，它逐渐演变为一种通用的符号处理机器，一种可以模拟、延伸乃至部分替代人类认知功能的存在。互联网的诞生，则将无数孤立的智能节点连接成一个全球性的、有机的信息生态系统，知识的生产、传播与消费方式发生了根本性变革。从深蓝击败卡斯帕罗夫到AlphaGo攻克围棋，从海量数据中挖掘隐秘规律到大型语言模型生成近乎人类的文本，我们目睹的不仅是技术的奇观，更是一种新型“智能”形态的萌芽。人工智能，作为这场革命当前最耀眼的产物，其本质是人类将部分决策与创造过程形式化、算法化，并交由机器执行。它正在重构从医学诊断、药物研发、金融交易到艺术创作、科学发现的几乎每一个领域。工具，至此已从肢体的延伸（锤子）、能量的转换（发动机）、感官的拓展（望远镜），进化为了心智的辅助乃至伙伴。我们正站在一个前所未有的门槛上：工具不仅改变着我们如何做事，更开始深刻地影响我们如何思考、如何认知世界以及如何定义自身。这带来无与伦比的福祉，也孕育着复杂的伦理困境、社会结构与存在主义危机。当我们谈论未来时，我们本质上是在谈论人与工具共同进化的下一篇章——那将是一个智能无处不在、算法深度嵌入现实、生物与机器界限日益模糊的时代。对工具的创造与反思，因此不再是单纯的技术活动，而已成为我们这个时代最核心的哲学命题与生存实践。

In the deep veins of civilization, the use and creation of tools has always been the fundamental mark that distinguishes humankind from other life forms, and the invisible gear that drives the wheels of history forward. From the Paleolithic era when humans first consciously struck flint to create sharp edges, to the Neolithic era's taming of clay and fire; from the early chemical wisdom and power totems embodied in bronze artifacts, to the Iron Age's plowshare turning over the soil of feudal society and swords redrawing the political map of Eurasia; the history of tool development is a condensed history of human intellectual evolution and social organizational change. However, what truly propelled this process from linear accumulation to exponential explosion was undoubtedly the epoch-making roar of the steam engine. It was not only a physical revolution in power, converting thermal energy into mechanical energy, but also a profound social and philosophical revolution: it declared that humanity was no longer entirely dependent on the unpredictable gifts of nature, such as muscles (whether human or animal), wind, and water power, but had for the first time mastered a continuous, controllable, and powerful autonomous power source. Factory chimneys replaced rural smoke, trains and ships compressed the distance of time and space, and standardized production reshaped the rhythm of labor and life. The ensuing electrical age further transformed energy into an almost invisible, instantly accessible, easily divisible, and controllable form. Electric lights dispelled the darkness of nature, telegraphs and telephones allowed information to travel at the speed of light for the first time, and electric motors gave machines a flexible life. If steam power shaped the skeleton and muscles of industrial cities, then electricity injected them with a sensitive nervous system and insomnia-like vitality.

From the mid-20th century to the present, we are living in what may be a more profound "cybernetics-information revolution." The starting point of this revolution can be traced back to Turing's abstract thinking on "computability" and Shannon's great insight in stripping information from its concrete meaning and giving it mathematical measurement. The invention of transistors and integrated circuits brought about a fundamental leap in information processing (computation) and storage. Computers are no longer merely high-speed calculators; they have gradually evolved into general-purpose symbol processing machines, entities capable of simulating, extending, and even partially replacing human cognitive functions. The birth of the internet has connected countless isolated intelligent nodes into a global, organic information ecosystem, fundamentally transforming the ways in which knowledge is produced, disseminated, and consumed. From Deep Blue defeating Kasparov to AlphaGo conquering Go, from uncovering hidden patterns in massive amounts of data to large-scale language models generating near-human text, we are witnessing not only technological wonders but also the budding of a new form of "intelligence." Artificial intelligence, as the most dazzling product of this revolution, is essentially the formalization and algorithmization of some human decision-making and creative processes, which are then handed over to machines for execution. It is reshaping almost every field, from medical diagnosis, drug development, and financial transactions to artistic creation and scientific discovery. Tools have evolved from extensions of the limbs (hammers), energy conversions (engines), and sensory expansions (telescopes) to aids and even partners of the mind. We are standing on an unprecedented threshold: tools are not only changing how we do things but are also beginning to profoundly influence how we think, how we perceive the world, and how we define ourselves. This brings unparalleled benefits but also breeds complex ethical dilemmas, social structures, and existential crises. When we talk about the future, we are essentially talking about the next chapter of the co-evolution of humans and tools—an era where intelligence is ubiquitous, algorithms are deeply embedded in reality, and the boundaries between biology and machines are increasingly blurred. The creation and reflection on tools are therefore no longer merely technological activities, but have become the most fundamental philosophical propositions and existential practices of our time.
我以前是一个语文老师。今天来了很多小朋友。你们喜欢语文吗？不喜欢是吧？你们声音喊得很大，没找两个托吗？确实，我以前的学生也是这样。说实话，很多学生对于语文的这种学习状态是不太喜欢的。

在他们圈子里面流行着这么一句话：叫“一怕文言文，二怕周树人，三怕写作文”。文言文很难，鲁迅很难。门口有个枣树，旁边还是一个枣树，表达了作者怎样的思想感情？三怕写作文，孩子们写作文就跟便秘一样。各位家长你们一定明白这个事儿。不仅孩子们怕，我们老师也怕。我们在语文老师圈子里面流行这么一句话：叫“上辈子杀了猪，这辈子来教书。上辈子杀了人，这辈子教语文”。所以我教两个班，可能上辈子杀了两个人。

那么我们为什么那么害怕语文？我特别想通过我自己跟中文的故事来跟大家聊聊，中文究竟具有怎样的力量。我从小生活在农村，这是我生活的小村子，这是我们家门口，一个苏北特别普通的小村子。那么要说有什么特别的地方，就是我们家家里人都还挺爱读书的。

我爷爷是一个农民，仅仅识字，但他喜欢读书。我印象非常深刻，有一个冬天他坐在外面，忽然哭了，七八十岁的时候，满头白发，哭得很伤心。我说，“爷爷你怎么了？”他说：“你知道吗，罗成死了。”我在想，罗成是家里哪个亲戚吗，你这么伤心？后来才知道他在读一本书，《隋唐英雄传》，里面有个人物叫罗成，死了。一个七八十岁的老人，满头白发，在阳光下被一本书感动得热泪盈眶。

我爸也挺喜欢读书。我爸就是一个普通的工人，当过水电工，当过泥瓦匠，什么都干过，但是他还喜欢写。他经常会给我写信。我当时跟今天来的很多同学差不多大，五、六年级。我会收到我爸的信，你知道，小学生收到父亲的信是一件特别高兴的事。我拿着这封信从头到尾读一遍，然后全班同学会传阅一遍，最后班主任语文老师会在全班朗读一遍。你自己的作文被朗读了，你当然高兴，你爸的还被朗读了，这是非常喜悦的一件事。

所以这一幕幕不断地冲击着我，让我对中文保有这种巨大的热爱，让我对阅读一直保持着最原始的那种兴趣。

所以上大学之后，很自然地我选择了中文系。在中文系里面，受一种所谓人文主义光芒的照耀，我读了一些书。但是印象最深的是一堂课。这堂课上，我们老师问我们一个问题：说你们觉得中文是什么？

我们很多人都有自己的想法。这个问题我也不断地问过我的学生们。我说：“语文是什么？中文是什么？”他们说就是听说读写、阅读理解、诗歌鉴赏。老师在黑板上写下了这样两行字：他说中文是一种感动，阅读是一场自由的梦。

我人生中少有的那种特别痴迷的时刻就在那个时刻。我还记得下午的阳光：中文是一种感动，我们可以快乐别人的快乐，可以悲伤别人的悲伤。阅读是一场自由的梦，我们可以在书本中大梦一场。这句话对我的启发非常大，影响也非常大。所以毕业之后，很自然地我选择了语文老师这个职业。

在最开始当语文老师的时候，我特别认真。我备课，每堂很普通的课大概要五、六个小时。我最后按下办公室灯的那一瞬间，整个学校都暗了。我自己都被自己感动到。你知道吗，我当时给自己教育的座右铭是：为教育献了青春献终身，献了终身献子孙。我想象着有一天我在讲台上轰然倒塌，捎带手感动中国，就那种感觉。

后来教了一段时间之后，发现跟我设想的语文课不太一样。尤其是教到鲁迅先生的一篇文章叫做《社戏》。大家应该有印象。我教到最后，我很喜欢鲁迅，几乎眼含热泪，眼睛里面闪烁着晶莹的小东西。我说：“同学们，你们明白吗？这是鲁迅作为一种知识分子的失根感。” 同学一脸木然地看着我。只有最后一个同学举手很热情，我以为他互动，我说：“来，你来说说看。” 他说：“老师，我要上厕所。” 我说：“你去吧。” 在他的冲水声中，我对于语文课堂的诸多幻想汹涌而去。

我想不能这样，因为我很喜欢语文。我特别想把我的这种热爱传递给学生们。那段时间正好教到刘禹锡的一首诗叫《秋词》：“自古逢秋悲寂寥，我言秋日胜春朝。”我就带着全班同学去操场上课，正好是一个秋天。我们一边晒着秋日的阳光，一边梧桐树叶沙拉拉地落下来，我们一起读着：“自古逢秋悲寂寥，我言秋日胜春朝。”那个下午感觉太棒了。我觉得整个学校、整个操场，所有的秋天都是属于我们的。

孩子们不是怕写作文吗？我就引导他们去写三行诗，因为诗歌很短小，他们愿意去表达。而当我教了这个之后，我才发现原来孩子们就是天生的诗人。他们写了这么一首诗，叫：如果我有翅膀，我一定飞到天上去，去拥抱你。这诗写了什么？这个孩子在怀念他逝去的一位亲人。如果我有翅膀，你看这种表达多好。

如果让我们现在孩子大部分写作文，写亲情怎么写？放学了，天上乌云密布。我没有带伞，这时候在教室后面出现了一个熟悉又陌生的身影，我一看，啊，是我的妈妈。然后你妈来一定只带了一把伞。妈妈把伞给我了，好不容易接回家，回家之后写作业，妈妈深夜给我端了一杯热牛奶。没有其它饮料，就是热牛奶。喝着喝着，晚上的时候，我要生病。这个病很重要，不能太严重，也一定要严重到足以能送你去医院。好，最关键的问题，妈妈怎么送我去医院？很好，大家小时候作文都这么写：背着我去医院。这时候天上一定要下雨，你妈反正不会开车，也不会打车。然后冒着雨送你去医院，这时候看着母亲两鬓斑白的头发、佝偻的后背，都是这种作文。

我在想孩子们为什么这么写作文。妈妈们一定都这样吗？当然不是。原因是什么？因为我们已经给母爱套了一个非常大的概念，就是无私。

所以，他们在写作的时候，妈妈一定是伟大的，妈妈一定是无私的。他们不会用自己的眼睛真正地去观察自己的母亲。还有孩子写到说：“见到你，我总有些感觉，就像纸上排列的格子变得方了。”这写的是啥？一个小男孩对一个女孩产生了一个非常朦胧的爱慕之情，这很正常。然后他用了一个比喻，这小男孩平时很能讲，但是见到这个女孩的时候什么感觉？就像纸上的格子方了，不会讲话了，多好。

还有个小男孩写，他说：“白菜黑了，蝈蝈死了，我不活了。”我说你这写的是啥？我说老师读不懂，太后现代了，你给我解释一下。他说：“老师，是这个样子的。我放学回家之后，拿墨汁滴在白菜上面，白菜不就黑了吗？然后拿这个黑的白菜喂蝈蝈，蝈蝈一吃，死了，我不想活了。”他养了一只蝈蝈，不想活了。我觉得这太单纯、太可爱了。后来我们全校诗歌朗诵的时候，我们也知道现在学校诗歌朗诵比赛基本上都是祖国、母亲这些。我们班的诗歌朗诵，所有的同学上台朗诵自己的诗歌，最后全班齐读：“白菜黑了，蝈蝈死了，我不活了。”那是我到今天为止听过的最浪漫的朗诵，太棒了，因为那就是独属于你们最真挚的声音。

我跟孩子的关系处得非常好，但是因为后来我个人的原因，必须离开学校。那时候也没有告诉他们，怕影响他们的期末考试。等他们期末考试完了，我告诉他们。但有些孩子提前已经知道了，给我弄了个欢送会。欢送会特别感人，每个人拍一张自己的照片，然后在旁边写了一行特别动人的文字，比他们平时作文写得好多了。然后装订成一本册子，用包装纸包好了，包装纸上用各国语言写着“我爱你”。然后每个孩子准备了一个礼物，就是一个很温馨的场景。但有个小孩特别可爱，小男孩给我送的是花，然后隔了我五米，开始鞠了个躬。然后在我面前放下花出门去了，一个温馨的场景就变得很诡异。后面的同学都模仿他，每个人鞠个躬出去。然后我们学校的校服还都是白色，每个人在走廊里面哇哇地哭。你说知道的人以为我走了，不知道的人以为我真的走了。

后来我们班我当时跟全班同学讲：“我说老师以后不能再教你们了，我要走了。”然后班长说：“老师你不要走。”副班长说：“让他走吧，他是个诗人。”然后有个小男孩，很高的个子，然后一把把我搂到怀里。我从来没在一个男人的怀里这样哭过，一边拍我的后背一边哇哇地哭。他说：“老师，以后我们文坛上见。”说实话，当时我自己能不能上文坛我都不知道，但是我已经非常清楚地知道，文学的种子已经在他的心里面扎下了根。

离开学校之后，我成了一个半专业的写作者。我当时离开学校的辞职信特别简单，就一句话：“我想当一个作家。”校长看了之后：“你想干啥？”我说：“我想当一个作家。”离开了学校，开始写身边的人、身边的故事。我觉得这两年自己干的挺酷的一件事就是在沙漠里面徒步走了100多公里。今天听到一个小朋友12岁就干过这个事，我就不讲了，是吧？不想讲了。但是这个事里面特别有意思的一个环节，因为参加这个活动的基本上都是企业家，比我年龄也大很多。我是个youth是吧？他们年龄比我大很多，然后聊到这个话题的时候，他们聊自己的生意，聊自己的事业。

但是有一天，吃晚饭的时候，那个大哥很有意思，一边抠脚，一边吃晚饭。吃完之后陪我在沙漠里面逛逛。我们看到远处夕阳西下，在天边下去的时候，他说：“小马，那破诗怎么说来着？” 我说：“你是不是想说，大漠孤烟直，长河落日圆？” 他一拍大腿，他妈的，就这句诗。

我说，“这没有大漠孤烟直，只有长河落日圆。” 这大哥很有意思，丢给我一根香烟，让我点上。我平时不抽烟。他说你点上。他说：“你看这烟直不直。” 我说：“直直直！”

在那一瞬间，我明白一个道理，就是我们经常讲诗歌、文学离我们现在生活越来越远，其实它没有远离我们。诗歌跟文学恒久的生命力就是当我们走在沙漠里面的时候，当我们人生面对各种困境的时候，文学会一下一下冲击我们内心。这就是文字的力量。

所以今天跟大家聊这些，我觉得还是出于我个人的职业病。虽然离开了讲台，虽然现在站上舞台，我始终记得我曾经是一个老师。我希望大家还能多去读一些书。爸妈们应该多读一些书，因为很多父母问我说：“老师，如何让孩子养成良好的阅读习惯？”其实说白了就一点，你跟孩子一起读，这是最好的方式。就像我的父亲，就像我的祖父一样，你的孩子一定会喜欢阅读。

孩子们也要多读一些诗。那么以后你到了秋天的时候，你至少走在路上，你能够说说出很多关于秋天美妙的诗句。你走在沙漠里面的时候，你能够说出“大漠孤烟直，长河落日圆”，而不是“这太阳好圆啊，666666”。你能够用自己最中文的语言去表达这些东西。

我前段时间出了自己的一本散文集，叫《一别之后》。后来我把这本散文集送给了我的学生们，我从他们的表情中都能看得出他们内心的那种喜悦、骄傲、高兴。这是他们语文老师写的书，这里面还有属于我们自己的故事。很多人读了我这本书之后也说：“马老师，你写的挺好的，你文字很感人。”但是，最感动的一个评价是来自于我的学生。

她给我写了一封不算长的信，我想以这个信作为一个结尾，为什么以这个信作为一个结尾？我想让大家知道文字，发自内心的文字究竟具有怎样的力量：

“今天收到了老马寄的书。上回见面的时候看了打样图，他在对面以惊人的速度吃着一大盘鱼。当我剪开绿色的包裹，把它从小盒子里抽出来，看到外封上那张很拽的像模像样的作家照片时，才突然意识到，我第一回见到他时，还是个小学刚毕业的孩子。老马是一个很特别的人，更是一个很特别的老师。也是他的出现，才让我认识到我对一切的敏感是多么宝贵，才让我开始慢慢学着了解自己，让我知道世上竟有这样与我有共鸣的人，让我能够坦然地面对我的生活。从这一点来说，他是我重要的导师。他真诚地对待我们每个人，他就像一个大孩子，笑嘻嘻地跳到你面前，向你伸出手，要和你做朋友。他从前总说不能用教高中生的方式教我们，他说他是在用教人的方法教我们。现在我上了高中，身处这样的人群之中才知道，被那样认真对待过的人是不一样的。我感到很庆幸。我清楚地记得，他在学校礼堂上的最后一次主持，他激动而深情地为我们朗诵了《相信未来》，在台上哭得满脸通红，我们在台下一个劲擦着擦不完的眼泪。所有人都在鼓掌，就好像电影里才会有的场景。收到书之后，母亲要去看了，听我说有那篇写我们的文章，便直接翻到了那页，一边揽着我弟，一边悄悄掉眼泪。她说：‘你先看看，完给我看。’马哥在扉页上留了一行字，字还是不好看，但应该是练过了：秦茜，希望有一天能收到你的书。我想我有许多答应了却没做到的事，但我一直记得在认清这个世界的本来面目之后，依然爱着这个世界。还有，永远年轻，永远热泪盈眶。”

我今天要跟大家分享的就这么多，希望大家能够记住一句就够了：“中文是一种感动，阅读是一场自由的梦。”谢谢。
I used to be a Chinese language teacher. Many children are here today. Do you like Chinese? No, you don't, right? You're all shouting so loudly, didn't you hire a couple of shills? Indeed, my former students were like that too. To be honest, many students don't really like this learning style of Chinese.

There's a saying circulating among them: "First, they fear classical Chinese; second, they fear Zhou Shuren (Lu Xun); third, they fear writing compositions." Classical Chinese is difficult, Lu Xun is difficult. There's a jujube tree at the door, and another jujube tree next to it—what thoughts and feelings does the author express? Third, they fear writing compositions; for the children, writing compositions is like constipation. Parents, you must understand this. Not only are the children afraid, but we teachers are too. There's a saying circulating among Chinese language teachers: "If you killed a pig in your past life, you're teaching in this life. If you killed a person in your past life, you're teaching Chinese in this life." So, since I teach two classes, maybe I killed two people in my past life.

So why are we so afraid of Chinese? I especially want to talk to you about the power of the Chinese language through my own story with it. I grew up in the countryside. This is my small village, right outside my house, a very ordinary little village in northern Jiangsu. What's special about it is that everyone in my family loves reading.

My grandfather was a farmer, only literate, but he loved reading. I remember very clearly one winter when he was sitting outside and suddenly cried. He was in his seventies or eighties, his hair completely white, and he was crying very sadly. I asked, "Grandpa, what's wrong?" He said, "Do you know, Luo Cheng died." I wondered, was Luo Cheng some relative? Why was he so sad? Later I learned he was reading a book, *The Heroes of the Sui and Tang Dynasties*, and there was a character named Luo Cheng who died. A seventy or eighty-year-old man, his hair completely white, was moved to tears by a book in the sunlight.

My dad also loved reading. My dad was an ordinary worker; he'd worked as a plumber, a bricklayer, he'd done all sorts of jobs, but he also loved writing. He often wrote me letters. I was about the same age as many of the students here today, in fifth or sixth grade. I would receive letters from my dad, and you know, for a primary school student, receiving a letter from their father was a very happy thing. I read the letter from beginning to end, then the whole class circulated it, and finally, our homeroom teacher, the Chinese language teacher, read it aloud to the class. You're happy when your own essay is read aloud, but when your dad's is read aloud, it's a truly joyful thing.

These scenes constantly impacted me, instilling in me a tremendous love for Chinese and a primal interest in reading.

So, naturally, I chose to major in Chinese literature in university. In the Chinese department, illuminated by a so-called humanistic light, I read quite a few books. But the most memorable was a class. In that class, our teacher asked us a question: What do you think Chinese is?

Many of us had our own ideas. I've asked this question to my students many times. I said, "What is Chinese language? What is Chinese literature?" They said it's listening, speaking, reading, writing, reading comprehension, and poetry appreciation. The teacher wrote these two lines on the blackboard: He said Chinese is a kind of emotion, and reading is a free dream.

That was one of the few moments in my life when I was truly captivated. I still remember the afternoon sunlight: "Chinese is a kind of emotion; we can share in others' joy and sorrow. Reading is a free dream; we can dream big within books." This sentence greatly inspired and influenced me. So, after graduation, it was natural for me to choose the profession of Chinese language teacher.

When I first started teaching Chinese, I was incredibly dedicated. I prepared lessons, spending about five or six hours on each even ordinary class. The moment I finally switched off the office light, the entire school went dark. I was moved by my own dedication. You know, my motto for education at that time was: "Dedicate my youth, my life, and my descendants to education." I imagined one day collapsing on the podium, incidentally moving China—that kind of feeling.

Later, after teaching for a while, I found that the Chinese lessons weren't quite what I had envisioned. Especially when teaching Lu Xun's article, "The Village Opera." You should all remember it. Towards the end, I loved Lu Xun so much that my eyes almost welled up with tears, glistening with tiny, crystalline tears. I said, "Class, do you understand? This is Lu Xun's sense of rootlessness as an intellectual." The students looked at me blankly. Only the last student raised his hand enthusiastically. I thought he was trying to engage, so I said, "Come on, you tell us." He said, "Teacher, I need to go to the toilet." I said, "Go ahead." With the sound of his flushing, all my fantasies about the Chinese language class vanished.

I thought I couldn't let it go like this, because I love Chinese. I especially wanted to pass on this love to my students. Around that time, we were teaching a poem by Liu Yuxi called "Autumn Song": "Since ancient times, autumn has been associated with sorrow and desolation, but I say that autumn days surpass spring mornings." So I took the whole class to the playground for class, and it happened to be autumn. We basked in the autumn sun, the sycamore leaves rustling down, and we read together: "Since ancient times, autumn has been associated with sorrow and desolation, but I say that autumn days surpass spring mornings." That afternoon felt wonderful. I felt that the whole school, the whole playground, all of autumn belonged to us.

Aren't the children afraid of writing compositions? I guided them to write three-line poems because poems are short and easy for them to express themselves. And after teaching them this, I realized that children are natural poets. They wrote a poem called: "If I had wings, I would fly to the sky and embrace you." What does this poem describe? This child is remembering a deceased loved one. If I had wings, see how beautiful this expression is?

If we asked most of our children to write an essay about family affection, how would they write it? School's out, the sky is overcast. I didn't bring an umbrella. Then a familiar yet unfamiliar figure appears at the back of the classroom. I look, ah, it's my mom. Then I realize my mom only brought one umbrella. Mom gave me the umbrella, and after finally getting home, I did my homework. Late at night, Mom brought me a cup of hot milk. No other drinks, just hot milk. As I drank it, I realized I was going to get sick. This illness is important; it can't be too serious, but it has to be serious enough to take me to the hospital. Okay, the most crucial question is, how does Mom take me to the hospital? Great, everyone wrote essays like this when they were little: "She carried me to the hospital." It had to rain, because your mom couldn't drive or take a taxi. Then she'd brave the rain to take you to the hospital, and those essays were all about seeing your mother's graying hair and hunched back.

I wonder why children write essays like this. Are all mothers like this? Of course not. Why? Because we've already attached a very broad concept to maternal love: selflessness.

So, when they write, their mothers are always great, always selfless. They don't truly observe their own mothers with their own eyes. Another child wrote, "When I see you, I always have a feeling, like the squares on a piece of paper become square." What is this describing? A little boy develops a very vague affection for a girl, which is normal. Then he uses a metaphor: this little boy is usually very talkative, but how does he feel when he sees this girl? Like the squares on a piece of paper becoming square, he can't speak anymore—how wonderful!

There was also a little boy who wrote, "The cabbage turned black, the cricket died, I don't want to live anymore." I said, "What are you writing? I can't understand it, it's too postmodern. Can you explain it to me?" He said, "Teacher, it's like this. After I got home from school, I dripped ink on a cabbage, and the cabbage turned black. Then I fed this black cabbage to the cricket, and the cricket ate it and died. I don't want to live anymore." He had a cricket, and he didn't want to live anymore. I thought it was so innocent and adorable. Later, during our school-wide poetry recitation, we learned that most school poetry recitation competitions now focus on the motherland and motherhood. In our class's poetry recitation, all the students went on stage to recite their own poems, and finally, the whole class read together, "The cabbage turned black, the cricket died, I don't want to live anymore." That was the most romantic recitation I've ever heard to this day. It was wonderful because it was your most sincere voice.

I had a very good relationship with the children, but later, due to personal reasons, I had to leave the school. I didn't tell them then, afraid it would affect their final exams. I told them after their exams. But some kids already knew and threw me a farewell party. The farewell party was incredibly touching. Everyone took a photo of themselves and wrote a very moving message next to it, much better than their usual essays. Then they bound it into a booklet, wrapped it in wrapping paper with "I love you" written in various languages. Each child prepared a gift; it was a very heartwarming scene. But one child was particularly adorable. The little boy gave me flowers, then bowed from five meters away. He left the flowers in front of me and went out, turning a heartwarming scene into something very strange. The other students all imitated him, bowing and leaving. And since our school uniforms were still white, everyone was crying loudly in the hallway. You could say those who knew thought I was gone, and those who didn't thought I really was gone.


Later, I told the whole class, "I can't teach you anymore, I'm leaving." The class monitor said, "Teacher, don't go." The vice-monitor said, "Let him go, he's a poet." Then a very tall little boy hugged me tightly. I had never cried like that in a man's arms before, patting my back and sobbing uncontrollably. He said, "Teacher, see you in the literary world someday." To be honest, at that time I didn't even know if I could make it in the literary world, but I knew very clearly that the seed of literature had taken root in his heart.

After leaving school, I became a semi-professional writer. My resignation letter was very simple, just one sentence: "I want to be a writer." The principal read it and asked, "What do you want to do?" I said, "I want to be a writer." After leaving school, I started writing about the people and stories around me. One of the coolest things I did in the past two years was trekking over 100 kilometers in the desert. Today I heard that a 12-year-old did this, but I won't go into details, right? I don't want to talk about it anymore. But there was a particularly interesting part to this whole thing. Most of the participants were entrepreneurs, much older than me. I'm a young person, right? They were all much older than me, and when the topic came up, they talked about their businesses and their careers.

But one day, during dinner, this guy was quite amusing. He was picking his toes while eating. After dinner, he accompanied me for a walk in the desert. As we watched the sunset in the distance, he said, "Little Ma, what was that lousy poem again?" I said, "You mean, 'A lone plume of smoke rises straight from the desert, the setting sun sinks round over the long river'?" He slapped his thigh, "Damn, that's it."

I said, "There's no 'a lone plume of smoke rises straight from the desert,' only 'the setting sun sinks round over the long river.'" This guy was interesting; he tossed me a cigarette and told me to light it. I don't usually smoke. He said, "Light it." He said, "Look how straight this smoke is." I said, "Straight, straight, straight!"

In that instant, I understood something: we often say that poetry and literature are getting further and further away from our lives, but actually, they haven't left us at all. The enduring vitality of poetry and literature lies in how it resonates within us, whether we're traversing the desert or facing life's challenges. This is the power of words.

So, I feel the reason I'm sharing this with you today stems from my professional instincts. Although I've left the lecture hall and now stand on stage, I always remember that I was once a teacher. I hope everyone will continue to read more books. Parents, in particular, should read more, because many parents ask me, "Teacher, how can I cultivate good reading habits in my child?" Simply put, the best way is to read with your child. Just like my father and grandfather, your child will surely love reading.

Children should also read more poetry. Then, when autumn arrives, at least when you're walking down the street, you'll be able to recite many beautiful verses about autumn. When you're walking in the desert, you'll be able to say, "The lone smoke rises straight from the desert, the setting sun is round over the long river," instead of just "Wow, the sun is so round, 666666." You'll be able to express these things in your own authentic Chinese language.

I recently published a collection of essays called *After a Farewell*. Later, I gave this collection of essays to my students, and I could see the joy, pride, and happiness in their expressions. It was a book written by their Chinese teacher, and it contained our own stories. Many people who read this book said, "Teacher Ma, you write very well; your writing is very moving." But the most touching comment came from one of my students.

She wrote me a short letter, and I want to end with this letter. Why this letter as an ending? I want everyone to know the power of words, the power of words that come from the heart:

"I received the book Lao Ma sent me today. Last time we met, I saw the proof; he was eating a huge plate of fish at an astonishing speed across from me. When I cut open the green package, pulled it out of the small box, and saw the very cool, professional-looking author's photo on the outer cover, I suddenly realized that the first time I met him, I was just a kid who had just graduated from elementary school. Lao Ma is a very special person, and even more so, a very special teacher. It was his appearance that made me realize how precious my sensitivity to everything is, that allowed me to slowly learn to understand myself, that I knew there were people in the world who resonated with me, and that allowed me to face my life with equanimity. In this respect, he is an important mentor to me. He treats each of us sincerely; he's like a big kid, jumping up to you with a smile, reaching out his hand, wanting to be your friend. He used to say he couldn't teach us like he would high school students; he said he was teaching us like he would teach people. Now that I'm in high school, surrounded by such people..." It was only in the group that I realized how different it is to be treated with such seriousness. I felt so fortunate. I clearly remember his last time hosting in the school auditorium; he recited "Believe in the Future" for us with great emotion and passion, his face flushed with tears as he cried on stage, while we in the audience kept wiping away our endless tears. Everyone was applauding, like a scene from a movie. After receiving the book, my mother wanted to read it. When I told her about the article about us, she immediately turned to that page, hugging my brother and secretly shedding tears. She said, "You read it first, then show it to me." Ma Ge left a line on the title page; the handwriting was still not good, but he must have practiced: "Qin Qian, I hope to receive your book someday." I think I have many promises I haven't kept, but I always remember that even after recognizing the true nature of this world, I still love it. And, forever young, forever with tears in my eyes.

That's all I wanted to share with you today. I hope you can remember just one sentence: "Chinese is a kind of emotion, reading is a dream of freedom." Thank you.
我是一名纪录片工作者，从上个世纪八十年代开始拍纪录片。但是在我最初的纪录片的拍摄生涯里，除了我的家人会关注片尾的字幕，几乎我是不配拥有姓名的。尽管我拍过自然类的、社会类的、历史类的各种纪录片，直到有一天我把镜头对准了中国人引以为傲的美食。

《舌尖上的中国》节目播出的时候，我刚好来成都出差。在餐厅里有一个人突然到我的桌子面前，说他认得到我。他说你就是那个把全中国的美食都拍了个遍，但是故意不拍四川的人。难道成都不配拥有姓名吗？那一刻我想，哎呀我不会是红了吧？

现在，更多人以为我是一个做美食的。其实美食和纪录片有特别多的重合的地方，我想在这儿跟大家分享一下。首先什么是美食？我读书的时候在电视台实习，跟着央视的老师去拍摄中国首届美食节，吃了很多的餐厅。

拍美食和拍别的最大的不同就是它有一个福利，就是可以吃道具。拍摄完了我们吃饭，上来了一碗东西，鱼翅。然后我们的灯光师说：“我从小就不吃粉丝，把这个给我撤下去。”大家就嘲笑他说这是鱼翅，可不是粉丝。我嘲笑的声音最响亮，因为我之前也不知道什么是鱼翅。我小心翼翼地掩盖着我的虚荣，但是我内心是认同这种价值判断的，就是好的东西，美食，是我们平时吃不起的，它是小众的。

后来我开始写美食专栏，时间长了，我会琢磨一个问题：如果真的按现在你们在手机APP里看的那种评星标准，最好吃的可能是皇帝的宫廷菜，其次是当官儿的官府菜，然后是有钱的商帮菜，最不济也是个文人菜。那可以说全国的所有的城市，没有任何一个城市可以赶上北京，能够聚合这么多的资源。

那么为什么貌似广州、苏杭、成都，都比北京好吃的多得多？这道理非常简单——美食它不应该是小众的，它应该藏在大多数人的一日三餐里。从那以后我也开始关注普通的食物，关注那些不再装疯迷窍，但是又能够温暖人心的食物。在我们后来的节目里面，这种东西可能就更加明显。我们选择的几乎都是最平凡的食物，所以才会有像枕头馍，像瓦屋山的冷笋、豆瓣酱，扬州的千层油糕。

我们为什么要选择这样的食物呢？等节目播出以后，其实我受到了很多的这个，说好听的叫善意的提醒，说不好听叫批评。它有来自美食专家的，会说我们没有表现出中国美食的精髓。也有我的同行，他说你把一个纪录片拍得这么诱人、这么馋，是不是有失纪录片的严肃性？

当然我觉得这个非常好，大家提醒的都非常好。但是就像对食物一样，每个人都有自己独特的判断。我希望的，就是不管是食物还是纪录片，它都不应该是小众的，它应该是有更多人的共鸣。

我们也更关注美食背后的人。他们就像我们的家里的亲戚，就像我们的街坊邻居一样，我们在拍他们的时候也丰富着我们自己的人生。

我年轻的时候，一位作家一段话影响了我，他说做一个记者可以陪伴别人的一生。人生这么短暂，你可以过好多辈子。这个真的是打动了我。在我的同行里不缺这样的前辈，比方说广州的周浩导演，他拍摄一个派出所，他用了两年的时间。我们成都的王海兵导演，拍摄大宁河上的船夫，现在大宁河已经完全没有船夫了，他还在拍摄，那用了十年的时间。那么国外可能还有更极端的例子，像日本的导演小川深切，拍摄成田机场农民和当局的抗争，拍摄了整整二十五年。

我们的片子看上去非常轻松，但是其实背后也有非常多不为人知的付出。大家可能都还记得这位老人——张爷爷。都记得我们拍的他做的手工的空心面条。其实空心挂面到处都有，离我们不远的中江县就有。我们当时在全国找了六个地方，一点点地找人，前后花了一年多的时间，最后在节目里面只有七分五十六秒。

这是一个什么样的投入产出比呢？当时我们拍摄张老汉的时候，他已经骨癌的晚期了。最后节目播出的当天，他躺在床上看到了在电视里看到了自己，安然地闭上了眼睛。我们导演说他好像替老人过了整整一辈子。

除了人，我们要求对食物也是这样。大家都以为我们的工作特别开心，天天吃，其实不是这样的。我们面对食物的时候确实是如履薄冰。我们会请教非常多的专家，我们会努力的找到这种食物的前世今生，我们甚至要找到它的历史传承，非常清晰的脉络，还有当地的地理风物和他之间的关联。如果我们展示给观众的是海面上的冰山，其实我们拥有的，是不仅仅是海面上的百分之三到五的部分，我们甚至还拥有海面底下的百分之九十五，这只有我们自己心里清楚。

当然，最后我们要求导演有一句话叫要和你的主人公，要和你的食物谈一个恋爱。当然也有导演提出了反对的意见，说“和主人公谈恋爱，这个我能懂，和食物谈恋爱，最终我们还都把它吃了。那难道我们是章鱼，是螳螂，是黑寡妇蜘蛛吗？”这当然是一个笑话。

相比关注食物的意义，其实我们作为一个专业主义的崇拜者，我们更关注我们讲故事的方法。纪录片，它作为电影艺术的一个重要的分支，它是舶来品，但是它是国际语言。我们希望大家能够把我们的片子不仅仅当作品看，也可以当娱乐消遣的产品来看。我们能够把平静的食物讲出风生水起的故事，我们自己觉得是对观众的尊重：戏剧化的情节、奇幻的视觉效果和专业化的视听语言。我们希望观众在张弛有序的这种节奏里面，有一个看纪录片的愉快的这种感受。

当然食物也是国际语言，我们大家说的交流的英文“communication”，它的词根“communing”就是当年分面包的一种仪式。那你看吃和交流有那么深的关系。

不过由于大家相处的地域不同，经常是你之砒霜，我之蜜糖。很多人吃不到一锅里去。那我就想，我们有没有办法来找到他们为什么会吃这种东西？它背后的原因是什么？让大家能够把各自的“味觉信息茧房”做一个连接。

有一个故事是这样的，一个以色列的小伙子在成都的街头唱歌。他非常热爱成都，也热爱成都的美食，但是他非常想念自己的老家的胡姆斯酱，也就是鹰嘴豆做的酱。有一天有个人把他带到了菜市场，告诉他这个东西叫“耙豌豆儿”。他用来调了一点白芝麻，加了一点橄榄油，完全是在故乡的生活。

另一个故事是一对四川的夫妇在伦敦留学，他们天天想吃豌杂面。无奈从超市里买了鹰嘴豆酱，加了郫县豆瓣儿，浇了点红油，发现原来这种东西可以在万里之外能够整个的复制出来。我说这句话的意思是，其实食物都有一些共同的东西，有一些共通的东西，有一些你中有我、我中有你的东西。

这些年我们拍摄的风味系列，一直在寻找这个星球上不同族群之间的共同智慧。小到一张面饼，多到这个火腿的工艺，你发现这个世界上从来没有一个东西说只在这个地方有，而在别的地方没有，其实都有相似的东西。当然我们的努力也没有白费。从我们做的风味系列，在全球最大的流媒体平台Netflix上，曾经霸占了美食类纪录片的六个月的榜单的榜首。《时代周刊》采访我们的标题是《他们用食物帮助人们更加了解中国》，我觉得这是对我们工作的肯定。其实我们一直想说的是，从这些这么多共同的东西里边，我们能看到人类其实是一个大家庭。

最后我想说，如今的社会高速变化，商业化已经深入到了我们生活的每一个方面。那么我们为什么要做美食纪录片呢？社会发展肯定是向前的，从漫长的人类历史上看，有些东西注定要消失，但是有些习俗，有些生活方式，它是我们的祖先，它是我们人类多样化生存的样本。我们从食物里找到这些即将消失的印记，以及其中能够呈现出的民间的原生的力量。我觉得这是我们探寻真相、讲述故事的原动力。

作为纪录片人，我们也非常的幸运。智利作家古兹曼说过一句话，“一个国家没有纪录片，就像一个家庭没有相册一样”。我们的工作就是为中国美好的食物做一个非常精致、沉甸甸的相册，我们一直在努力。
I'm a documentary filmmaker, having started in the 1980s. But in my early career, aside from my family paying attention to the end credits, I was practically unknown. Despite making various documentaries—nature, society, history—one day I turned my lens to the cuisine that Chinese people are so proud of.

When the documentary series *A Bite of China* aired, I happened to be in Chengdu on a business trip. In a restaurant, someone suddenly came up to my table and said he recognized me. He said, "You're the one who filmed all the food in China, but deliberately avoided Sichuan. Doesn't Chengdu deserve a mention?" At that moment, I thought, "Oh no, am I going to become famous?"

Now, many people think of me as someone who makes food documentaries. Actually, there's a lot of overlap between food documentaries and documentary filmmaking, which I'd like to share with you. First, what is food? When I was in school, I interned at a television station, accompanying CCTV to film China's first Food Festival, where I ate at many restaurants.

The biggest difference between filming food and filming other things is that it has a perk: you can eat the props. After filming, we ate. A bowl of something was served – shark fin soup. Our lighting technician said, "I've never eaten vermicelli since I was a child, take this away." Everyone laughed, saying it was shark fin, not vermicelli. I laughed the loudest because I had no idea what shark fin was. I carefully concealed my vanity, but deep down I agreed with this value judgment: good things, good food, are things we can't afford normally; they're for a select few.

Later, I started writing a food column. Over time, I started thinking about this: if we really used the star rating system you see on mobile apps, the best food would probably be imperial cuisine, followed by official cuisine, then wealthy merchant cuisine, and at the very least, scholarly cuisine. That means no city in the entire country could match Beijing in terms of the concentration of resources.

So why do Guangzhou, Suzhou, Hangzhou, and Chengdu seem to have much better food than Beijing? The reason is very simple – good food shouldn't be for a select few; it should be found in most people's daily meals. Since then, I've also started paying attention to ordinary food, to food that isn't pretentious or outlandish, but still warms the heart. This became even more apparent in our later programs. We almost exclusively chose the most common foods, hence the inclusion of items like pillow-shaped steamed buns, cold bamboo shoots from Wawu Mountain, fermented bean paste, and Yangzhou's layered oil cake.

Why did we choose these kinds of foods? After the program aired, I received a lot of feedback—some kindly, some harshly, some critical. Food experts said we hadn't captured the essence of Chinese cuisine. My colleagues also questioned whether making a documentary so tempting and mouthwatering compromised its seriousness.

Of course, I think that's excellent; everyone's feedback is valuable. But just like with food, everyone has their own unique perspective. What I hope for is that neither food nor documentaries should be niche; they should resonate with a wider audience.

We also focus on the people behind the food. They are like our relatives, like our neighbors; filming them enriches our own lives. When I was young, a writer's words influenced me greatly. He said that being a journalist allows you to accompany someone throughout their life. Life is so short, yet you can live many lifetimes. This truly touched me. Among my colleagues, there are many such predecessors. For example, director Zhou Hao from Guangzhou spent two years filming a police station. Director Wang Haibing from Chengdu filmed boatmen on the Daning River; even now, there are no boatmen left on the Daning River, yet he continues filming—that took him ten years. And there are perhaps even more extreme examples abroad, like the Japanese director Fukaki Ogawa, who filmed the struggle between farmers and authorities at Narita Airport, a project that took him a full twenty-five years.

Our film appears very lighthearted, but behind the scenes, there is a great deal of unseen dedication. Many people may still remember this elderly man—Grandpa Zhang. They remember the hollow noodles we filmed him making by hand. Hollow noodles are actually found everywhere, even in Zhongjiang County, not far from here. We searched six locations across the country, painstakingly finding people, spending over a year in total, and finally, it only appeared for seven minutes and fifty-six seconds in the program.

What kind of return on investment is this? When we filmed Old Zhang, he was already in the late stages of bone cancer. On the day the program aired, he lay in bed and saw himself on television, then peacefully closed his eyes. Our director said it felt like he had lived the old man's entire life.

Besides people, we demand the same from food. Everyone thinks our work is incredibly enjoyable, eating every day, but that's not the case. We truly walk on thin ice when dealing with food. We consult numerous experts, we strive to find the origins and history of each food, even its historical lineage, its very clear context, and its connection to the local geography and customs. If what we show the audience is an iceberg on the surface, we actually possess more than just the top three to five percent; we even possess the ninety-five percent beneath the surface—something only we ourselves truly know.

Of course, in the end, we require the director to have a line that says, "You must fall in love with your protagonist, with your food." Of course, some directors raised objections, saying, "Falling in love with the protagonist is understandable, but falling in love with food, and ultimately we all eat it? Are we octopuses, mantises, or black widow spiders?" This is, of course, a joke.

Compared to focusing on the meaning of food, as devotees of professionalism, we are more concerned with our storytelling methods. Documentaries, as an important branch of film art, are an imported art form, but they are an international language. We hope that viewers can see our films not only as works of art, but also as entertainment. We feel that our ability to tell a compelling story about ordinary food is a sign of respect for the audience: dramatic plots, fantastical visual effects, and professional audiovisual language. We hope that viewers will have a pleasant experience watching documentaries within this well-paced rhythm.

Of course, food is also an international language. The English word "communication," as we all know it, has the root "communing," which originated from the ritual of dividing bread. You see, there's such a deep connection between eating and communication.

However, due to geographical differences, what is poison to one is honey to another. Many people can't find common ground. So I wondered, is there a way to understand why people eat certain foods? What are the underlying reasons? To connect everyone's "taste information cocoons."

There's a story about an Israeli young man singing on the streets of Chengdu. He loved Chengdu and its food, but he missed his hometown's hummus, a sauce made from chickpeas. One day, someone took him to a market and told him it was called "roasted peas." He used it, seasoned with white sesame seeds and olive oil, completely reliving his hometown.

Another story is about a Sichuan couple studying in London. They craved pea and minced meat noodles every day. Out of desperation, they bought chickpea sauce from the supermarket, added Pixian chili bean paste, and drizzled some chili oil, discovering that this dish could be completely replicated thousands of miles away. What I mean is that food often shares commonalities, commonalities, and a sense of interdependence.

Over the years, our "Flavor" series has been exploring the shared wisdom among different groups on this planet. From a simple flatbread to the craftsmanship of ham, you discover that nothing in this world exists exclusively in one place; there are always similarities. Our efforts haven't been in vain. Our "Flavor" series topped the list of food documentaries on Netflix, the world's largest streaming platform, for six months. Time magazine's interview with us, titled "They Use Food to Help People Understand China Better," is a testament to our work. What we've always wanted to say is that through these many shared elements, we can see that humanity is one big family.

Finally, I want to say that in today's rapidly changing society, commercialization has permeated every aspect of our lives. So why do we make food documentaries? Social development is inevitably forward. Looking at the long history of humankind, some things are destined to disappear, but some customs and lifestyles are the legacy of our ancestors, samples of our diverse human existence. We find these disappearing traces in food, and the raw, authentic power of the people within them. I believe this is the driving force behind our pursuit of truth and our storytelling. As documentary filmmakers, we are also very fortunate. As Chilean writer José Guzmán once said, "A country without documentaries is like a family without a photo album." Our work is to create a very exquisite and substantial photo album of the wonderful food of China, and we are constantly striving towards this goal.
我是一个做儿童文学的，所以我平常在外面也会习惯观察小朋友，

有一次我就看见了一个妈妈带两个小孩，一个六岁、一个四岁，两个小男生争一个小汽车，就吵起来了。然后那个妈妈就跟哥哥说，跟你讲过多少次了，出来吃饭不要吵，好不好？

那个哥哥说，可是他抢我的汽车！他妈说，那你给他啊！这时候，这个孩子问他妈妈一个重要的问题，为什么我要给他？

对，为什么要给他？

标准答案就是，因为你比较大，你是哥哥，你要让弟弟，他妈就是这样回答的。这小孩反应非常快，他马上问她妈说，哎呦，那我这辈子不是完了吗？他不可能不比他弟弟大，将来分财产，还要多跟他一份。

你看这小孩看得有多远呢？可见他翅膀要多高。

好了，可是他的妈妈这时候很火大，她为了解决眼前的问题，就跟这个男生说，你再不把汽车给你弟弟，我就叫老板娘来把你做成人肉包子！

好，事情结束了，问题在哪里呢？这时候孩子学会的是教育还是教训？问题就在这里，就是说，我们在培养孩子的翅膀，可是当他有机会飞起来的时候，我们就嫌麻烦，就把他绑住，他就得到了教训。问题是，绑住以后，他是不会再长大的，跟以前裹小脚一样，如果你把那个小脚骨裹断掉，它就不会再大。我现在告诉大家，孩子的翅膀能有多大。

你们现在看到这个小朋友叫Katherine，2006年的时候，她只有五岁，4月6号她在家里看电视，看电视上在演非洲的纪录片。那讲到什么呢？讲到非洲每三十秒钟会死掉一个小朋友，所以Katherine就在沙发上算一、二、三、四，算到三十的时候，她开始发抖。

她妈妈就问她说，你在干嘛？她说，非洲死了一个小朋友。这个时候如果是人肉包子妈妈就会说，非洲死小孩跟你有什么关系？你这个神经病！

没有，她妈妈就帮她上网去查，非洲为什么会死小孩？原来最重要的是疟疾。那疟疾最大的麻烦来源－蚊子，那怎么防蚊子？就是要有蚊帐，那非洲为什么没有蚊帐？没有钱。好了，过了两个礼拜，Katherine幼稚园的老师打电话给她妈妈说，Katherine的点心费都没有交。她妈妈就问小朋友说，钱不是给你了吗？你拿去哪里？

小朋友说什么？她就说，我不吃点心了，我要干嘛？买蚊帐。

这个时候如果人肉包子妈妈出来就会说，这个钱就是你吃点心的，你买什么蚊帐，你就给我好好吃点心！没有，她妈妈就带她去买了蚊帐。然后要送啊，结果上网去查，真的有一个机构叫“只要蚊帐基金会”，专门送蚊帐去非洲，就把蚊帐送过去。

然后，小朋友就得到一个谢卡，说她是最年轻的捐赠者，因为她只有五岁，然后还告诉她，如果捐十顶蚊帐可以有一张奖状。所以Katherine想要一张奖状，她就把她的娃娃、旧的书、旧的玩具拿出来卖。结果有没有人买？没有，旧的东西卖不掉。

她就想，她有一张奖状的话，别人也应该有一张，所以她就自己动手画了十张奖状。结果第二天东西就全部卖光，大家因为那个奖状可爱，所以想鼓励这个孩子。然后她就开始，牧师也鼓励她，老师鼓励她，她就到处去募款，可是募到的钱远远不够非洲要用，这时候怎么办？

她居然写信给比尔·盖兹，然后信里这样写的：亲爱的比尔盖兹先生，非洲的孩子如果没有蚊帐就会死掉，但是他们没有钱买蚊帐，听说钱都在你那里。

她还画了一张奖状给比尔·盖兹。比尔·盖兹怎么办？他拿出三百万美金出来支持这个活动，所以五岁的Katherine等于救了超过一百万的非洲孩子。现在非洲有一个村叫凯萨琳蚊帐村，因为里面的蚊帐全部是她的名字。

我现在要讲的是说Katherine这样的小朋友，是因为她很天真、不知道世界有多困难吗？才会去做这样大的事情吗？不是，是旁边的大人要帮她，大人要让孩子的翅膀变大。

所以我当时就受这个故事感动，想说4月6号有这样的故事，那每天都会有一个孩子可能有一个梦想想要实现，应该把它写下来，用这样真实的故事来教育孩子，让他们知道自己的翅膀有多大。果然就有，像这个小朋友，九岁的菲利斯，他是在德国，三年在德国种了一百万棵树。这个十岁小朋友提莉，小女生，她在南亚大海啸，因为她的机警，救了整个沙滩的观光客。

还有这个依克巴，他四岁的时候，在巴基斯坦被卖做童工，六岁的时候被救出来，可是他花了六年的时间，救出了其他四千五百个跟他一样的童工，他在十二岁的时候，被人口贩子开枪打死了。但是他的死，引起了加拿大另外一个小朋友奎格（的注意），他想说他十二岁，我也十二岁，所以他去做拯救儿童基金会，他现在在南亚有四百五十个学校，每天有四万五千个童工在上课。

当然就还有这个，世界最年轻的诺贝尔和平奖的得主——马拉拉，她讲了一句话很重要：一支笔、一本书、一个学生、一个老师就可以改变世界。

好，让我们来看看，我们的老师是怎么改变我们的世界。

我一个朋友的小孩，小学一年级进去学校，开始考选择题，跟刚才张老师讲的一样。问说下面哪一个东西会生长，答案是小草、种子、桃树。只能选一个，标准答案是什么？小草。

那你说种子不会生长吗？对不起，种子会发芽。那桃树呢？桃树会开花。所以只有桃树能开花，种子能发芽，小草要生长。

所以麻烦在哪里呢？所以语文的教育，不是文学教育，它是一个思考的教育。因为人是用语言在思考的，如果你用这样僵化的语言在思考，那你将来长大，学电机理工再厉害，你能怎么样？你也只能做代工。

很多同学、很多人说，你这样讲很厉害，那你做给我们看看。所以我就来实验，我每个礼拜就跟十个左右的小朋友，小学二年级的，教他们写作。实验怎么做？就跟刚才张老师讲的一样，我们的教育就是只有记忆，然后理解，再来就没有了。

好像唐诗，大家都会背，现在小学一年级的居然也会背到一百首的，真的疯了。可是你这个时代，我们这一生背那么多唐诗有没有用过？没有，通通没有用。因为你背来都不晓得怎么用，好，那应该怎么学？我就跟小朋友说，这样子，这首诗大家都会背，也懂，现在照著李白的这个意思去写一首诗出来，但是不用押韵，还有呢？不可以写月亮。

其中一个二年级的小朋友怎么写？“天上的白云，好像会飞的棉花糖，我抬头看著天上的白云，低头想起去年暑假，阿嬷带我去吃的那碗刨冰。”

是不是“床前明月光，疑是地上霜，举头望明月，低头思故乡”？这小孩很厉害，把刨冰跟乡愁结合在一起。可是这种天才是他自己天生会吗？不是，是教练引导出来的。

重点要抬头，抬头看有什么东西，有云、有鸟。那云跟什么东西像？棉花。那棉花怎么到天上去？要会飞。好了，那你怀念谁？阿嬷。那阿嬷做什么事情你很开心，然后跟白色有关？刨冰。刨冰是吃的，所以棉花应该怎样？棉花糖。全部结起来了。

另外一个小朋友写什么？“电线上的麻雀好像五线谱上会飞的音符，我抬头看著天上的小鸟，想起第一次弹吉他给我听的舅舅。”

这就是“床前明月光，疑是地上霜，举头望明月，低头思故乡”。

好，所以关键在哪里？我就跟小朋友规定说叫我教练，不要叫我老师，为什么？因为教练是来发掘你的专长的。如果你是左手，教练不会叫你去守三垒，因为这样你就一定会漏接。如果你是右手，教练不会叫你守一垒。

老师不是，我们现在老师的概念是，把你全部弄成一模一样的人。如果老师能把自己想成是教练，世界就不一样，结构就会改变。

那我现在再讲一个真实改变结构的事情。这是美国的一个老人院，刚才我们看到弘道老人基金会做了很多事，这个叫Grace Living Centers，是一个很贵的老人院，可是这个老人院有个问题，就是老人进来以后，都躲在房间里不出来。为什么？就是老人也不想跟老人交朋友，我以后老了也不想跟老人交朋友。好，所以老人都不出来。

刚好这个老人院旁边有一个幼稚园，老人院的院长就跟幼稚园的园长商量说，可不可以让小朋友过来这边上上课，所以小朋友就过来了。小朋友一来，这个老人院的结构就改变了，因为它有小朋友，所以老人就跟小朋友变朋友，开始熟起来，以后就每天做互动。那老人跟小朋友做什么互动？讲故事。讲什么故事？小红帽大野狼？不是，讲他自己的故事。讲他自己年轻的时候有多帅、有多厉害、年轻的时候有多美、有多少人追。

可是这些事情，他自己家里的人，都怎样？不想再听了，因为听了太多遍。可是幼稚园的小朋友有什么好处？他不怕重复，而且他需要重复。所以他就会再问说，林爷爷，你再讲一次，那个美金应该藏在哪里？黄爷爷，你再讲一次，那个窃听器要怎么装？结果很惊人的一个发现是，这个幼稚园的小朋友，五岁的孩子，语文的能力超过外面十岁的小朋友。为什么？因为他们每天接触的是有结构、有意义的话，都是故事。

我们的父母大部分跟小朋友讲话的时候，都是讲一些没有意义、没有结构的话。什么叫没有意义、没有结构的话？去洗澡、赶快刷牙、不要看电视、赶快吃饭，就是这个。这个就是没有意义、没有结构的话。所以你一定要进入故事跟孩子，你要强迫自己的语言进入一个结构。

最厉害的是，这些孩子怎样，他们EQ的能力，就是控制情绪的能力，超过外面的青少年、超过高中生。为什么？因为这些孩子四、五岁就看到生老病死。释迦牟尼二十九岁才看到，所以这些孩子可以比释迦牟尼早开悟二十五年。所以全部是一个结构。

我们现在回来看小朋友阅读的结构是什么？

其实孩子三岁的时候就要开始养成阅读习惯，可是这时候他有什么问题？他的语言开始丰富了，要养成阅读。还有什么问题？他不认识字，一定要大人讲给他听。

可是我们现在的大人怎样？Too busy？不是。是Too lazy，太懒。所以就没人讲给他听，他就会错过这个打底的黄金期，就会过了。好，我们现在面对电子书的来临，电子比纸本有什么好处？

它有声音、它可以动，所以我们就做了一台阅读器，把我们所有的绘本都做成动画，然后这时候再配上最好的音乐、美术，然后有好的人讲故事，孩子就可以自己听故事。最重要的是我们把一个机构放进去，就是父母可以把自己的声音录进去，让孩子怎样？可以播出来以后，就像父母在讲故事。

那所有的小朋友都是怎样？只要父母有录过这个故事，他就一定要先听父母录过的。这就是孩子需要的不是阅读而已，是什么？爱。

我们为什么怀念台湾？出国的时候，怀念台湾什么？小吃，因为我们的阿嬷、我的妈妈对我们好就是给我们一个什么？煮一个东西给我们吃。我们不会在法国巴黎拿起一本书来说，这就是我妈每天念给我听的《小王子》，然后眼泪流下来。我们的乡愁停留在口腔期，所以你如果爱跟阅读可以紧密结合，这个时候这个力量就会很大。

我们自己碰到一个真实的案例，有一天客人拿著这个大熊机来，要我们把里面的声音抽出来做备份，为什么？因为他的弟弟，就是这个爸爸给他的女儿买了很多大熊机，然后录了很多故事，可是这个爸爸不幸地车祸过世了，可是他现在还是每天可以给女儿讲故事。这个才叫音容宛在。他怕机器万一坏掉，声音就跑掉了，所以我们抽出来给他做备份。同样，我自己碰到也是这样一个故事，真实的。

有一个圣诞节，我接到一个旧金山马琳太太写给我的信，她的小女儿叫娜欧米，当时四岁，有什么问题？要开心脏的手术。结果娜欧米在进手术房之前跟她妈妈说，妈妈不要害怕，看这本书就不会怕。结果那本书是什么？是我写的书，叫《皇帝与夜莺》，就是一个皇帝想要长生不死结果都失败，后来发现死亡也没这么可怕。所以马琳太太才知道为什么她的女儿会有勇气，那本书当时有英文版，医院有买，护士有讲给娜欧米听。

后来娜欧米运气很好，手术很成功，所以她妈妈就写了一个卡片来感谢我，我就跟她要了这张照片来，我就把这张照片放在我的手机、放在我的皮夹，只要有挫折的时候拿出来看一看，为什么？只要你相信一个孩子在世界遥远的地方，因为你的努力而得到力量，那你花掉再多钱，浪费太多力气，碰到再多笨蛋都值得。

可是一样，我们在教育孩子，孩子也在教育我们。其实孩子是什么？他是透过挑战比自己大的事情来了解自己，然后来衡量自己、得到快乐、然后成长。我们人也是一样，我们学佛、信耶稣，都是想要达到更高的境界。

所以你现在可以说，没有，我的孩子不要变成释迦牟尼、不要变贾伯斯、不要变Katherine，那就没有办法。那我只能说，老鹰的翅膀是用来飞的，鸡的翅膀是用来烤的。

可是问题是，鸡的翅膀怎么烤呢？最近我有一个朋友的孩子进大学，考选择题，历史课：一八九五年，谁在台湾组织抗日义勇军，答案是丘逢甲、丘逢乙、丘逢丙。

我相信今天坐在这里的朋友都是有翅膀的人，我们才能看见别人的翅膀。我们都相信孩子翅膀要更大，才能飞得更高，像纪伯伦讲的一样，孩子是上帝手中生命的箭，因为放在你的手里，你是一个弓，你要把他射得更远。

今天我们就是要让孩子射得更远，就像那个音容宛在的爸爸，他现在每天还在给女儿说故事，每天把他女儿推得更远。这就是我们活著的人该做、而且想做的事才对。谢谢！
I work in children's literature, so I often observe children when I'm out and about.

Once, I saw a mother with two children, a six-year-old and a four-year-old. The two boys were fighting over a toy car. The mother said to the older boy, "How many times have I told you? Don't fight when we're out eating, okay?"

The older boy said, "But he took my toy car!" His mother said, "Then give it to him!" At this point, the child asked his mother an important question: "Why should I give it to him?"

Yes, why should he?

The standard answer is, "Because you're older, you're the older brother, you have to give way to your younger brother." That's how his mother answered. This child reacted very quickly. He immediately asked his mother, "Oh dear, does that mean my life is over? He can't possibly be younger than his brother, and when it comes to dividing the inheritance, he'll have to get a bigger share."

See how far this child can see? It shows how high his wings are.

Okay, but his mother was furious. To solve the immediate problem, she told the boy, "If you don't give the car to your brother, I'll call the shop owner to turn you into a human meat bun!"

Okay, that's the end of it. But where's the problem? Did the child learn a lesson or a punishment? The problem is this: we're nurturing our children's wings, but when they have the chance to fly, we find it troublesome and tie them up, and that's how they learn their lesson. The problem is, once tied up, they won't grow anymore, like bound feet. If you break the foot bones, they won't grow. Now I'll tell you how big a child's wings can really be.

Now you see this little girl named Katherine. In 2006, she was only five years old. On April 6th, she was watching TV at home, watching a documentary about Africa. It was about how a child dies every thirty seconds in Africa. So Katherine was counting on the sofa—one, two, three, four—and when she got to thirty, she started trembling.

Her mother asked her, "What are you doing?" She said a child died in Africa. If it were a mother who only knew about children, she would say, "What does the death of a child in Africa have to do with you? You're crazy!"

No, her mother helped her search online: Why do children die in Africa? It turns out the main cause is malaria. And the biggest problem with malaria is mosquitoes. So how do you prevent mosquitoes? You need mosquito nets. Why don't they have mosquito nets in Africa? Because they don't have money. Okay, two weeks later, Katherine's kindergarten teacher called her mother saying that Katherine hadn't paid her snack fee. Her mother asked the child, "Didn't we give you the money? Where did you take it?"

What did the child say? She said, "I don't want snacks anymore. What do I need it for?" "To buy a mosquito net."

If it were a mother who only knew about children, she would say, "This money is for your snacks! Why are you buying a mosquito net? Just eat your snacks properly!" No, her mother took her to buy a mosquito net. Then, wanting to send them, she searched online and found an organization called the "Just the Mosquito Nets Foundation," which specializes in sending mosquito nets to Africa. So she sent the mosquito nets there.

Then, the little girl received a thank-you card, saying she was the youngest donor because she was only five years old. She was also told that if she donated ten mosquito nets, she would receive a certificate. So Katherine wanted a certificate, so she took out her dolls, old books, and old toys to sell. Did anyone buy them? No, the old things wouldn't sell.

She thought that if she had a certificate, others should have one too, so she drew ten certificates herself. The next day, everything sold out. People thought the certificates were cute and wanted to encourage the child. Then she started, with encouragement from the pastor and teachers, she went everywhere to raise funds, but the money she raised was far from enough for Africa's needs. What to do then?

She actually wrote a letter to Bill Gates, saying: "Dear Mr. Bill Gates, children in Africa will die without mosquito nets, but they don't have the money to buy them. I heard the money is with you."

She even drew a certificate for Bill Gates. What did Bill Gates do? He donated three million dollars to support the campaign, so five-year-old Katherine effectively saved over a million African children. Now there's a village in Africa called Katherine's Mosquito Net Village because all the mosquito nets there are named after her.

What I want to say is, did little girls like Katherine do such great things because they were naive and didn't know how difficult the world was? No, it was because the adults around her wanted to help her; adults wanted to help children grow.

So I was moved by this story and thought that since there's a story like this on April 6th, every day a child might have a dream they want to realize. We should write it down and use these true stories to educate children, letting them know how big their wings are. Sure enough, there are examples like nine-year-old Phyllis, who planted a million trees in Germany over three years. And there's ten-year-old Tilly, a little girl who, during the South Asian tsunami, saved countless tourists on a beach with her quick thinking.

Then there's Iqbal, who was sold into child labor in Pakistan at age four and rescued at six. He spent six years rescuing 4,500 other child laborers like himself before being shot and killed by human traffickers at age twelve. His death caught the attention of another Canadian boy, Quigley, who thought, "I'm twelve too," so he started Save the Children. Now he runs 450 schools in South Asia, providing daily education for 45,000 child laborers.

And then there's Malala Yousafzai, the world's youngest Nobel Peace Prize laureate, who said something very important: "A pen, a book, a student, a teacher can change the world."

Okay, let's see how our teachers are changing our world.

A friend's child, starting first grade, was given multiple-choice tests, just like Teacher Zhang mentioned earlier. The question was: Which of the following will grow? The answers are grass, seeds, and peach trees. Only one can be chosen. The standard answer is: grass.

You might ask, don't seeds grow? Sorry, seeds sprout. And peach trees? Peach trees blossom. So only peach trees can blossom, seeds can sprout, and grass must grow.

So where's the problem? Language education isn't just about literature; it's about critical thinking. Because humans think with language. If you think with such rigid language, what will you achieve even if you excel in electrical engineering or science later in life? You'll only be able to do contract manufacturing.

Many students and many people say, "You're very good at explaining this, so show us." So I started an experiment. Every week, I teach about ten second-grade students how to write. How do I do this experiment? Just like Teacher Zhang mentioned, our education only focuses on memorization and understanding, and that's it.

It seems everyone knows Tang poems by heart; even first graders can recite a hundred! It's crazy. But in this era, have we ever used all those Tang poems we've memorized? No, absolutely none. Because you memorize them without knowing how to apply them. Okay, so how should we learn them? I tell the children, "Everyone knows this poem, and understands it. Now, write a poem based on Li Bai's meaning, but without rhyming. And what else? You can't write about the moon."

One second grader wrote: "The white clouds in the sky are like flying cotton candy. I look up at the white clouds, then look down and remember the shaved ice my grandma took me to eat last summer."

Isn't it "The bright moonlight shines before my bed, I suspect it is frost on the ground. I raise my head to gaze at the bright moon, then lower my head and think of my hometown"? This child is amazing, combining shaved ice with homesickness. But is this kind of genius innate? No, it's guided by a coach.

The key is to look up, to see what's there—clouds, birds. What does the cloud resemble? Cotton. How does cotton get to the sky? It needs to fly. Okay, so who do you miss? Grandma. What did Grandma do that made you happy, and is related to the color white? Shaved ice. Shaved ice is for eating, so how should cotton be? Cotton candy. It all clumps together.

What did another child write? "The sparrows on the power lines are like notes flying on a musical staff. I look up at the birds in the sky and remember my uncle playing the guitar for me for the first time."

This is like "The bright moonlight shines before my bed, I suspect it is frost on the ground. I raise my head to gaze at the bright moon, I lower my head and think of my hometown."

Okay, so what's the key? I told the children to call me coach, not teacher. Why? Because a coach is there to discover your talents. If you're left-handed, the coach won't ask you to play third base, because you'll definitely miss. If you're right-handed, the coach won't ask you to play first base.

A teacher isn't like that. Our current concept of a teacher is to make you all the same. If teachers could see themselves as coaches, the world would be different; the structure would change.

Now, let me tell you about a real example of how this structure changed. This is a nursing home in the US. We just saw how much the Hongdao Senior Citizens Foundation has done. This is called Grace Living Centers, a very expensive nursing home. But this nursing home had a problem: once the elderly residents came in, they all stayed in their rooms and wouldn't come out. Why? Because the elderly didn't want to make friends with other elderly people. They thought, "I don't want to make friends with other elderly people when I'm old." So, the elderly didn't come out.

Coincidentally, there was a kindergarten next to this nursing home. The director of the nursing home discussed with the kindergarten principal whether the children could come and attend classes there. So, the children came. Once the children arrived, the structure of the nursing home changed. Because there were children, the elderly became friends with the children, started to get to know them, and then interacted with them every day. What kind of interaction did the elderly have with the children? Storytelling. What kind of stories? Little Red Riding Hood and the Big Bad Wolf? No, they told their own stories. They talked about how handsome, how capable, how beautiful, and how many people pursued them when they were young.

But what about his own family? They didn't want to hear it anymore, because they'd heard it too many times. But what's so great about kindergarten children? They aren't afraid of repetition; in fact, they need it. So they'd ask again, "Grandpa Lin, tell me again, where should that dollar be hidden?" "Grandpa Huang, tell me again, how do you plant that listening device?" A surprising discovery was that these five-year-old kindergarten children had language skills surpassing those of ten-year-olds outside. Why? Because they were exposed to structured, meaningful language every day—to stories.

Most parents, when talking to their children, use meaningless, unstructured language. What does meaningless, unstructured language mean? "Go take a bath," "Brush your teeth quickly," "Don't watch TV," "Eat quickly"—that's it. That's meaningless, unstructured language. So you must engage with children through stories; you must force your language to have a structure.

Most impressively, these children's EQ—their ability to control their emotions—surpasses that of teenagers and high school students. Why? Because these children, at four or five years old, witnessed birth, aging, sickness, and death. Shakyamuni Buddha only saw it at twenty-nine, so these children could attain enlightenment twenty-five years earlier than him. Therefore, it's all part of the same structure.

Now, let's look back at the structure of children's reading.

Actually, children should start developing reading habits at three years old, but what problems arise at this age? Their language is becoming richer, and they need to develop reading habits. What other problems are there? They don't recognize words yet and need adults to read to them.

But what about adults these days? Too busy? No. They're too lazy. So no one reads to them, and they miss this golden period for laying a foundation. Okay, now we're facing the advent of e-books. What are the advantages of e-books over paper books?

They have sound, they can move, so we created a reader, turning all our picture books into animations, then adding the best music and art, and having good people narrate the stories, so children can listen to the stories themselves. Most importantly, we've incorporated an institution where parents can record their own voices, allowing children to... Once it's broadcast, it's like parents telling a story.

And what about all the children? If their parents have recorded the story, they'll definitely want to listen to their parents' recording first. This shows that what children need isn't just reading, but love.

Why do we miss Taiwan? When we go abroad, what do we miss about Taiwan? The local snacks. Because our grandmothers and mothers were good to us by cooking something for us. We won't pick up a book in Paris and say, "This is the Little Prince my mom read to me every day," and then burst into tears. Our homesickness remains at the oral stage. So if you can closely combine love and reading, then the power is immense.

We encountered a real case. One day, a customer brought in this giant bear-shaped recorder, asking us to extract the audio for backup. Why? Because his brother, the father, had bought many bear-shaped recorders for his daughter and recorded many stories. Unfortunately, the father died in a car accident, but he can still tell stories to his daughter every day. That's what it means to have the voice and image remain. He was afraid that if the machine broke down, the audio would be lost, so we extracted the audio for him as a backup. Similarly, I encountered a similar story myself, a true one.

One Christmas, I received a letter from Mrs. Marlene of San Francisco. Her young daughter, Naomi, was four years old and needed heart surgery. Before going into the operating room, Naomi told her mother, "Mommy, don't be afraid. Reading this book will make you less afraid." What was that book? It was one I wrote, called *The Emperor and the Nightingale*, about an emperor who tried to achieve immortality but failed, eventually discovering that death wasn't so terrible. That's how Mrs. Marlene understood why her daughter had courage. The book had an English version at the time, which the hospital bought, and the nurses read it to Naomi.

Later, Naomi was very lucky; the surgery was successful. Her mother wrote me a thank-you card, and I asked her for this photo. I keep this photo on my phone and in my wallet, looking at it whenever I feel down. Why? If you believe that a child, somewhere far away in the world, gains strength because of your efforts, then no matter how much money you spend, how much energy you waste, or how many fools you encounter, it's all worth it.

But just like everyone else, we educate our children, and they educate us in turn. What is a child, really? They learn about themselves by challenging themselves with things greater than themselves, then measure themselves against their limitations, find joy, and grow. We humans are the same. When we study Buddhism or believe in Jesus, we are all trying to reach a higher state of being.

So you can say, "No, I don't want my child to become Buddha, Steve Jobs, or Katherine," and that's impossible. I can only say that an eagle's wings are for flying, and a chicken's wings are for roasting.

But the question is, how do you roast a chicken's wings? Recently, a friend's child entered university and took a multiple-choice exam in history: In 1895, who organized an anti-Japanese volunteer army in Taiwan? The answer was Qiu Fengjia, Qiu Fengyi, and Qiu Fengbing.

I believe that everyone sitting here today has wings; we only then can we see the wings of others. We all believe that children need bigger wings to fly higher. As Kahlil Gibran said, children are arrows of life in God's hand; because they are in your hand, you are the bow, and you must shoot them farther.

Today, we are here to help children shoot farther, just like that father whose voice and image are still vivid in our minds. He still tells his daughter stories every day, pushing her further each day. This is what we, the living, should do and want to do. Thank you!
九岁的时候，我第一次去参加夏令营。妈妈帮我整理好了行李箱，里面塞满了书。这对于我来说很自然，因为在我家，阅读是主要的家庭活动。听上去你们可能觉得我们不爱交际。但是对于我的家庭来说，这真的只是接触社会的另一种途径。读书的时候，有家人围坐在一起的温暖，同时你也可以自由地在你思维深处的冒险乐园里畅游。我以为野营也是这样子。在我的想象里，十个女孩坐在一个小屋里，都穿着合身的睡衣，惬意地享受着阅读。

结果，野营更像是一场派对，只不过没有酒水。第一天，辅导员就把我们集合在一起，教我们一套口号，接下来每天要念，好让“露营精神”感染我们。口号是这样的：大喊！大叫！狂欢！喧闹！我们 就 是 这 么 躁！

我不明白，我的生活为什么变成这样。为什么我们变得这么吵闹粗暴？但是我还是欢呼了，我与每个人都互相大声欢呼。我尽了我最大的努力，只盼着可以离开吵闹的派对，去捧起我挚爱的书的那一刻。

但是当我第一次把书从行李箱中拿出来的时候，宿舍里最酷的那个女孩向我走了过来，问我：“为什么你要这么安静？” 安静，这可是“喧闹”的反义词。当我第二次拿书的时候，辅导员满脸忧虑地向我走来。接着她重复了一遍“露营精神”，并且说我们都应当努力去变得外向些。

于是我把书放回了行李箱中，然后把箱子放到了床底下，在那里它们度过了暑假余下的每一天。我感到很愧疚，不知为什么，我感觉这些书是需要我的，它们在呼唤我，但是我却放弃了它们。我的确再也没有打开那个箱子，直到暑期结束，我和家人一起回到家中。

这样的故事，我可以给你们再讲50个。在每一个故事里，我都反复接收到同一个信息：那就是，我的文静内向的性格是不对劲的，我应该努力变成一个外向的人。而在我内心深处知道这是错误的，内向的人是非常优秀的。但是许多年来我都否认了这种直觉，于是我选择去华尔街当一名律师，而不是我长久以来想要成为的一名作家。部分原因就是我想要证明，我也可以变得勇敢而坚定。当我只是想和朋友一起好好吃顿饭，我却总是去那些拥挤的酒吧。我像条件反射一般，做出了这些自我否认的决定，甚至我都没有意识到自己在这样做。

这就是很多内向的人正在做的事情。这是我们的损失，但这同样也是身边同事们的损失，我们所在团队的损失。不夸张地说，这更是世界的损失。

因为在创造力和领导力方面，我们需要内向的人发挥出他们的天赋。全世界有三分之一到一半的人都是内向的。你知道吗，这意味着每两到三个人中就有一个内向的。所以即使你自己是一个外向的人，你的同事、你的配偶、你的孩子，还有现场坐在你身边的那个家伙，他们都要屈从于这样的偏见，一种在我们的社会中已经牢牢扎根的偏见。我们从很小的时候就把它内化了，甚至都不知道是怎么一回事。

现在，为了看清这种偏见，我们需要真正了解“内向”到底是什么。它和害羞是不同的。害羞是无法承受外界的目光，而内向更多是关于你对外在世界的反应。外向的人需要很多的刺激， 但内敛的人相反，他们对自身感受敏锐，反而在不被注目时最能发挥他们的能耐。当然，这也不是绝对的，但大部分时候是这样的。

所以，最大限度发挥我们才能的关键在于——把我们放到刺激强度刚好适合我们的环境里。

但就因为社会的偏见，我们的学校和职场，这些最重要的机构，却是为外向者设计的，给每个人都提供大量刺激。这样不成文的社会惯例，我称之为“新团体思考”，把所有的想像力跟创造力捆绑在一个群居的团体中。

想像一间典型的老式教室：在我上学的时候，我们都排排坐在行列整齐的书桌前，各自做功课。但现在，教室都把桌椅围起来，四、五、六、七个小朋友面对面，每个人都要参与团体作业，甚至连数学和创意写作这种可以独自完成的作业，都要小朋友像委员会成员一样参与讨论。而那些想要独自或独立完成作业的孩子，被视为不和群的异类，甚至是问题儿童。几乎所有老师都认为好的学生应该是外向活泼的，哪怕根据研究显示，内向的孩子成绩更好，甚至更博学多闻。

在职场上也是这样。我们大多在开放的空间工作，没有隔阂，我们持续暴露于嘈杂的声音跟同事的目光下。而关于领导能力，内向的人大多不被认为具有领导能力，就算他们行事更谨慎，少有为了出锋头冒不必要的险。这些品质不正符合我们对领导的期待吗？

Adam Grant在沃顿商学院的研究发现，内向的领导者往往更能胜任领导职责，因为他们善于管理不同的人才，让有远见的员工自由发挥。反之外向的领导者，不经意地会对事情反应过度，他们的见解较为主观，这使很多员工的创新想法没有机会被採用。

事实上，许多推动了改革的伟大领袖都是内向的人。埃莉诺·罗斯福，罗沙·帕克斯，甘地， 这些人对自我的描述都是内向、文静、说话温柔，甚至是害羞的人。他们矗立在镁光灯下，不是因为他们天生爱指挥，也不是想要万众瞩目。他们成为领袖是因为一种使命感，因为他们深知这是必须要做的。而人们可以明白感受到，他们当领袖不是因为好大喜功，而是责任感，驱使他们做认为对的事情。

现在我必须申明，我其实非常喜欢外向的人。我很多知心好友都是外向者，我亲爱的丈夫也是。内向外向就像个光谱，而我们坐落在不同程度的两端。心理学大师荣格说，世上没有纯粹的内向或是纯粹的外向的人。如果真有这样的人存在，他会被关进精神病院。在这道内向外向的光谱上，有的人刚好坐落在中间，我们称之为中间性格，我认为他们是最幸运的。但大多数的我们都自认不是外向就是内向。

我想表达的是，我们的社会文化需要平衡，需要内向外向，阴与阳的调和。这点在创造力与生产力的表现上尤其重要。因为根据心理学家的观察，最有创意的人群，不只擅长于交换意见、沟通与创新，更存有内向的特质。偶发的孤独感，是创造力的关键。所以，达尔文会独自在树林间漫步，且断然地拒绝晚餐宴会的邀约。西奥多·盖索，也就是著名的“苏斯博士”，是在他加州拉荷亚的老家一间寂寞钟塔里的书房，创造出许多举世闻名的童话书。而他其实非常害怕跟他的小读者们见面，因为他怕小朋友们看到他会期待落空，因为他不像圣诞老人那样亲和有趣。Steve Wozniak在惠普公司的一间小办公室里发明了世上第一台苹果电脑。他说如果他年轻时，不是因为太过内向，都宅在家里，他不可能成为了不起的工程师。

当然， 这绝非告诉大家我们从此不要再合作了。就像沃兹尼亚克和乔布斯两人同心协力才能创办苹果公司。但，独立自主是非常重要的。对一些人来说，这就是他们生活的方式。事实上，几世纪以来，我们都知道独处所带来的推动力，但直到近期我们不知怎么遗忘了。世界上那些伟大的宗教领袖——摩西、耶稣、佛祖、穆罕默德，你会发现这些人都远离尘嚣，独自走进旷野，然后寻得启示与顿悟，再把所得贡献回他们的社会。所以，没有独处的荒野，就不会有启示录。

这倒是不令人惊讶。如果你看过现代心理学的理论，你就会发现，我们甚至无法和一组人待在一起，而不去本能地模仿他们的意见与想法，甚至是在那些看上去最私人的、发自内心的事情上面，比如你被什么样的人吸引。你会开始模仿你周围的人的信仰，甚至都觉察不到你自己在做什么。

我们尤其容易在小圈子里追随能言善道的角色。但是最会说话的人并不见得是最有想法的人，你真的想要盲目追随吗？何不用自己的双脚走入孤独，领会属于自己的思想，不被群体思想控制，然后再互相合作，在一个健全的环境讨论交流，共同创造成果。

如果真相是这样的，我们为何错得一蹋糊涂? 我们为何把学校跟职场架设成那样? 我们为何要让这些内向者，因为想有独立自处的时间，而感到无所适从? 有个答案深植在我们的社会文化里。我们西方社会，特别是在美国，总是赞扬有行动力的人，而非有沉思能力的人。但在美国早期，历史学家称之“文化品格时期”，那时人们仍尊重公正清廉有内在涵养的人。综观那时的励志书籍，许多都有 “品格，世上最珍贵的东西” 这样的标题。书中会赞扬像林肯这样谦逊与不装腔作势的榜样，美国思想家爱默生称其 "锋芒不外露的人"。

然而随著二十世纪到来，我们进入了一个新纪元，历史上称之为“文化个性时期”。我们从农村经济演变为大型贸易体制，突然间人们从小乡镇涌入大城市，所以人们不再只是跟一起长大的人共事，而必须走进一群陌生人中，证明自己的能力。因此不难理解，领袖气质和个人魅力变得格外重要。自然地，励志书籍也改变路线了，开始出现像是 "如何赢得朋友和影响他人" 这样的书名，成功的推销员成了人们的榜样。这就是我们所生活的今天，我们的文化这样传承下来。

我不是说社交技能不重要，我也不是在说团队精神没有存在价值。宗教虽然把他们的圣人送到了孤独的山顶上，同时也仍然在教导我们爱与信任。而我们现今所面临的问题，变得如此广阔複杂，比如科学突破与经济发展。我们当然需要集思广益，共同解决眼前的难关。但如果我们能给内向者提供多一些个人空间，他们便有机会创造出独具慧眼的答案。

我今天带了这个行李箱到台上，想把里面的东西跟各位分享。猜猜裡面是什么? 书。满满一箱的书。这本是马格莉特·安特伍德的《猫之眼》，这本是米兰·昆德拉的小说，这本是麦蒙尼德的《迷途中的指南》。但其实这些书不属于我，我会带这些书来，是因为这些是我祖父最喜欢的作家的作品。

我祖父是犹太教教士，祖母过世后他独自住在布鲁克林的一间小公寓裡。那是我小时候最喜欢的地方，部分原因是那里充满祖父温柔的氛围，部分原因是那里全是书。每张桌子，甚至椅子，都被成堆成塔的书给占满了。和我家里的其他人一样，我祖父的嗜好就是阅读。

但他也很享受宗教集会。62年来，他每周都会在犹太教佈道会上讲道。他从书中吸收智慧，然后把古代的人文主义编织成思想的挂毯。他的听众从各个地方赶来，认真聆听他的传讲。

我祖父有个特点，在宗教领袖的角色背后，他是个非常谦逊与内向的人。他甚至紧张到不敢在布道时跟听众眼神交会，即使他都已经在同一个布道会传讲了62年了。甚至，当他走下讲台，人们向著他打招呼时，他会草草地结束话题，因为担心会占用别人太多的时间。但是当他在94岁那年过世时，交警不得不关闭许多邻近街道，来容纳蜂拥前来哀悼他的群众。

这些日子我试图用我自己的方式来效仿我的祖父。

我刚完成了一本关于内向性的书，这本书花了我七年的时间。这七年，对我而言是极大的恩典，因为我得以阅读、写作、思考、研究。相较于祖父的阅读与佈道，这是我的版本，我的表达方式。但现在我的工作变得非常棘手了，我必须要在公开场合，在演讲台上，跟你们谈论何谓内向。这不是我拿手的事情，但能站在这裡向你们说话，能对在坐的各位传达我的想法，是何等荣耀的事情。

所以我尽我所能，为了这一天做好准备。我花了一整年的时间，积极练习公开演讲。我称这段时间为"惊险的演讲之年"。这其实对我帮助很大。但让我获益最多的，是我的意识、我的信念、我的希望。我们对内向、沉默和独立者的态度，是可以被彻彻底底改变的。所以，我要呼吁在座各位，如果你跟我有共鸣，请帮我传达三个宗旨：

第一，不要再疯狂地过群体生活。赶紧停止吧，谢谢。我想要再次重申，因为我深深相信，我们的工作环境应该鼓励轻松休闲的聊天方式，就像喝下午茶那么自在，然后有感而发地交换意见。无论是对内向还是外向者，都该有多美好啊。而且我们在工作上，需要有更多的隐私、自由与自主权。在学校也是一样。我们要教孩子们携手合作，但我们也要教他们如何自主作业。这对外向的儿童尤其重要，他们需要学习自主独立，因为深度的见解就是那样产生的。

第二，去旷野探索吧。像佛祖一样，有自己的启示。我不是在说我们马上要去盖个山中小屋隐居起来，也不是要你们互不往来，而是呼吁大家可以除去障碍，更深切专心地进入自己的脑海里。

第三，好好地检查一下你的行李箱，裡面有什么，为何你要把它们放进去。外向的人们，也许你行李箱也装满了书，又或许塞满了香槟杯或高空跳伞设备。不管是什么，我希望你不时将它拿出来，与我们共同分享你的快乐与能量。而内向的人们，当你自己就好，你或许会害怕去跟别人分享你行李箱里的东西，那也没关係的。但偶尔，只是偶尔，我希望你会打开你的行李箱给他人瞧，因为世界需要你，需要你独有的特质。

我祝福你们的人生，能有最精彩的旅程，和轻声细语说话的勇气。
When I was nine, I went to summer camp for the first time. My mom packed my suitcase, stuffing it full of books. This felt natural to me, because reading was a primary family activity. You might think we're unsociable, but for my family, it was simply another way to connect with society. Reading offered the warmth of family gathered around, while also allowing you to freely roam the adventures of your own mind. I imagined camping would be like that. In my mind, ten girls sat comfortably in a cabin, all wearing fitted pajamas, enjoying reading.

However, camping was more like a party, except without drinks. On the first day, the counselor gathered us together and taught us a slogan to recite every day, to instill the "camping spirit" in us. The slogan went like this: Shout! Shout! Party! Be noisy! We're just that wild!

I didn't understand why my life had become like this. Why had we become so noisy and boisterous? But I still cheered, and I cheered loudly with everyone else. I tried my best, eagerly anticipating the moment I could leave the noisy party and pick up my beloved book.

But the first time I took the book out of my suitcase, the coolest girl in the dorm walked up to me and asked, "Why are you so quiet?" Quiet—the opposite of "noisy." The second time I took the book, my counselor approached me with a worried look. Then she repeated the "camping spirit" and said we should all try to be more extroverted.

So I put the book back in my suitcase, and then put the suitcase under my bed, where they spent the rest of the summer. I felt guilty; for some reason, I felt these books needed me, they were calling to me, but I had abandoned them. I never opened that suitcase again until the end of summer and I returned home with my family.

I could tell you 50 more stories like this. In every one of them, I received the same message: my quiet, introverted personality was wrong, and I should try to become an extrovert. Deep down, I knew this was wrong; introverts are incredibly talented. But for years I denied this intuition, and so I chose to become a lawyer on Wall Street instead of a writer, a career I'd longed for. Part of the reason was that I wanted to prove I could be bold and assertive. Instead of simply wanting to have a nice meal with friends, I'd always end up in crowded bars. I made these self-denying decisions almost reflexively, without even realizing it.

This is what many introverts are doing. It's a loss for us, but it's also a loss for our colleagues, for our teams. And, without exaggeration, a loss for the world.

Because we need introverts to reach their full potential in creativity and leadership. One-third to one-half of the world's population is introverted. You know, that means one in two or three people is an introvert. So even if you're an extrovert, your colleagues, your spouse, your children, and the guy sitting next to you are all succumbing to this prejudice—a prejudice that's deeply ingrained in our society. We internalize it from a very young age, without even realizing it.

Now, to see this bias clearly, we need to truly understand what "introversion" really is. It's different from shyness. Shyness is an inability to bear the gaze of others, while introversion is more about your reaction to the external world. Extroverts need a lot of stimulation, but introverts, on the contrary, are more sensitive to their own feelings and perform best when unnoticed. Of course, this isn't absolute, but it's true most of the time.

Therefore, the key to maximizing our talents lies in placing ourselves in environments where the level of stimulation is just right.

But because of societal bias, our schools and workplaces, these most important institutions, are designed for extroverts, providing everyone with a lot of stimulation. This unwritten social convention, which I call "new groupthink," binds all imagination and creativity to a communal group.

Imagine a typical old-fashioned classroom: when I was in school, we all sat in rows at neat desks, doing our homework. Now, classrooms are furnished with desks and chairs arranged in groups of four, five, six, or seven, facing each other. Everyone is required to participate in group projects, even for subjects like math and creative writing that can be done independently. Children are expected to participate in discussions like committee members. Those who want to complete assignments alone or independently are seen as outsiders, or even problem children. Almost all teachers believe that good students should be extroverted and outgoing, even though research shows that introverted children perform better academically and are even more knowledgeable.

The same applies to the workplace. We mostly work in open spaces, without barriers, constantly exposed to noise and the gaze of colleagues. Regarding leadership skills, introverts are generally not considered to possess leadership abilities, even if they act more cautiously and are less likely to take unnecessary risks to stand out. Aren't these qualities exactly what we expect from leaders?

Adam Grant's research at Wharton Business School found that introverted leaders are often better suited to leadership roles because they are adept at managing diverse talent and allowing visionary employees to flourish. Conversely, extroverted leaders can inadvertently overreact, and their opinions tend to be more subjective, preventing many employees' innovative ideas from being adopted.

In fact, many great leaders who drove reform were introverts. Eleanor Roosevelt, Rosa Parks, and Gandhi described themselves as introverted, quiet, soft-spoken, and even shy. They stood in the spotlight not because they were born to command, nor because they craved the limelight. They became leaders because of a sense of mission, because they knew it was necessary. And people could clearly sense that they became leaders not out of ambition, but out of a sense of responsibility, driving them to do what they believed was right.

Now I must state that I actually really admire extroverts. Many of my close friends are extroverts, as is my dear husband. Introversion and extroversion are like a spectrum, and we reside at opposite ends of that spectrum. The psychology master Carl Jung said that there are no purely introverted or purely extroverted people in the world. If such a person existed, they would be locked up in a mental hospital. On this spectrum of introversion and extroversion, some people happen to fall in the middle—we call them middle personalities—and I think they are the luckiest. But most of us consider ourselves either extroverted or introverted.

What I'm trying to say is that our social culture needs balance, a harmony between introversion and extroversion, yin and yang. This is especially important for creativity and productivity. Because, according to psychologists, the most creative people are not only adept at exchanging ideas, communicating, and innovating, but also possess introverted traits. Occasional moments of solitude are key to creativity. That's why Darwin would walk alone in the woods and resolutely refuse invitations to dinner parties. Theodore Gazelle, the famous "Dr. Seuss," created many world-renowned children's books in his study in a lonely clock tower in his old home in La Jolla, California. He was actually quite afraid to meet his young readers, fearing they would be disappointed because he wasn't as approachable and fun as Santa Claus. Steve Wozniak invented the world's first Apple computer in a small office at Hewlett-Packard. He said that if he hadn't been so introverted and stayed home a lot in his youth, he wouldn't have become such a great engineer.

Of course, this is by no means telling us to stop collaborating. Just like Wozniak and Jobs needed to work together to found Apple. But independence is crucial. For some, it's simply their way of life. In fact, we've known the driving force of solitude for centuries, but somehow we've forgotten it until recently. The world's greatest religious leaders—Moses, Jesus, Buddha, Muhammad—you'll find that they all retreated from the hustle and bustle, ventured alone into the wilderness, found revelation and enlightenment, and then contributed what they gained back to their communities. Therefore, without the wilderness of solitude, there would be no Revelation.

This is not surprising. If you've studied modern psychology, you'll find that we can't even be with a group of people without instinctively mimicking their opinions and thoughts, even on seemingly the most personal and heartfelt things, like who you're attracted to. You start imitating the beliefs of those around you, without even realizing it.

We are particularly prone to following eloquent figures within small circles. But the most eloquent person isn't necessarily the most insightful. Do you really want to blindly follow? Why not embrace solitude, develop your own thoughts, avoid being controlled by group opinions, and then collaborate in a healthy environment to discuss and create together?

If this is the truth, why have we been so wrong? Why have we structured schools and workplaces the way we do? Why do we make introverts feel lost and disoriented simply because they want time for solitude? An answer lies deeply rooted in our social culture. In Western societies, especially in the United States, action-oriented individuals are often praised over those with the capacity for reflection. But in early America, what historians call the "era of cultural character," people still respected those who were just, honest, and possessed inner cultivation. Many motivational books from that time were titled "Character, the most precious thing in the world." These books praised humble and unpretentious role models like Lincoln, whom American philosopher Emerson called "the man who doesn't flaunt his talents." However, with the arrival of the 20th century, we entered a new era, historically known as the "Age of Cultural Individuality." We evolved from rural economies to large-scale trading systems, and suddenly people flocked from small towns to big cities. People no longer simply worked with childhood friends; they had to step into a crowd of strangers and prove their abilities. Therefore, it's easy to understand why leadership qualities and personal charisma became exceptionally important. Naturally, self-help books changed course, with titles like "How to Win Friends and Influence Others" appearing, and successful salespeople becoming role models. This is the world we live in today, and this is how our culture has been passed down.

I'm not saying that social skills are unimportant, nor am I saying that teamwork has no value. Religions, while sending their saints to solitary mountaintops, still teach us about love and trust. And the problems we face today are so broad and complex—scientific breakthroughs and economic development, for example. We certainly need to brainstorm and work together to solve the challenges before us. But if we can give introverts more personal space, they have the opportunity to create insightful answers.

I brought this suitcase to the stage today, wanting to share its contents with you all. Guess what's inside? Books. A whole suitcase full of books. This is Margaret Underwood's *The Cat's Eye*, this is a novel by Milan Kundera, and this is McMonid's *Guide to the Lost*. But actually, these books don't belong to me. I brought them because they are works by my grandfather's favorite authors.

My grandfather was a rabbi, and after my grandmother passed away, he lived alone in a small apartment in Brooklyn. It was my favorite place as a child, partly because of my grandfather's gentle atmosphere, and partly because it was full of books. Every table, even the chairs, was piled high with books. Like everyone else in my family, my grandfather's passion was reading.

But he also enjoyed religious gatherings. For 62 years, he preached weekly at Jewish evangelistic meetings. He absorbed wisdom from books and wove ancient humanism into a tapestry of thought. His audiences came from all over to listen attentively to his sermons.

My grandfather had a unique characteristic: behind his role as a religious leader, he was an incredibly humble and introverted man. He was even so nervous that he avoided eye contact with his audience during sermons, even after preaching at the same synagogue for 62 years. Even when he stepped down from the pulpit and people greeted him, he would abruptly end his sermon, worried about taking up too much of their time. Yet, when he passed away at the age of 94, traffic police had to close many nearby streets to accommodate the crowds who flocked to mourn him.

These days, I'm trying to emulate my grandfather in my own way.

I've just finished a book about introversion, a book that took me seven years to complete. Those seven years were a tremendous blessing, allowing me to read, write, think, and research. This is my version, my way of expressing myself, compared to my grandfather's reading and preaching. But now my work has become very challenging; I must speak to you in public, on a platform, about what introversion truly is. This isn't my forte, but it's such an honor to stand here and speak to you all, to convey my thoughts.

So I did everything I could to prepare for this day. I spent a whole year actively practicing public speaking. I call that my "thrilling year of public speaking." It actually helped me a lot. But what benefited me most was my awareness, my beliefs, and my hope. Our attitudes toward introverts, the silent, and independent can be completely changed. So, I want to appeal to everyone here, if you resonate with me, please help me convey three points:

First, stop living such a crazy group life. Stop it now, thank you. I want to reiterate this because I firmly believe that our work environment should encourage relaxed, casual conversation, like having afternoon tea, and exchanging ideas freely. How wonderful that would be for both introverts and extroverts! And we need more privacy, freedom, and autonomy at work. The same goes for schools. We need to teach children to work together, but we also need to teach them how to work independently. This is especially important for extroverted children, who need to learn independence and self-reliance, because that's how deep insights are generated.

Second, go explore the wilderness. Like Buddha, find your own enlightenment. I'm not saying we should immediately build a mountain cabin and live in seclusion, nor am I suggesting you cut off all contact with each other, but rather urging everyone to remove obstacles and delve deeper and more attentively into their own minds.

Third, carefully examine your suitcase. What's inside, and why did you put it there? Extroverts, perhaps your suitcase is filled with books, or maybe champagne glasses or skydiving equipment. Whatever it is, I hope you'll take it out from time to time and share your joy and energy with us. Introverts, just be yourself. You might be afraid to share what's in your suitcase with others, and that's okay. But occasionally, just occasionally, I hope you'll open your suitcase and show it to others, because the world needs you, needs your unique qualities.

I wish you all the most wonderful journeys in your lives, and the courage to speak softly.

